Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
ADHD is a neurodevelopmental disorder. It is usually first diagnosed in childhood and often lasts into adulthood. But some people don't get diagnosed with ADHD until they are adults. ADHD involves:
Having trouble paying attention (inattention)Having trouble controlling impulsive behaviors (impulsivity)Being overly active (hyperactivity)
There are three types of ADHD:
Mostly Inattentive ADHD.People with this type of ADHD have trouble paying attention and are easily distracted. It's hard for them to organize or finish tasks. They may have trouble following instructions or conversations.Mostly Hyperactive-Impulsive ADHD.People with this type of ADHD have symptoms of both hyperactivity and impulsivity:With hyperactivity,people feel a need to always be moving. They have trouble sitting still and may fidget and/or talk too much.With impulsivity,people have trouble controlling their actions and words. They tend to act on sudden ideas or feelings without thinking about the possible results. They may interrupt others a lot or have trouble waiting their turn.Combined ADHD.People with this type of ADHD have a mix of inattentive and hyperactive-impulsive symptoms. Combined ADHD is the most common type.
With hyperactivity,people feel a need to always be moving. They have trouble sitting still and may fidget and/or talk too much.With impulsivity,people have trouble controlling their actions and words. They tend to act on sudden ideas or feelings without thinking about the possible results. They may interrupt others a lot or have trouble waiting their turn.
It's normal to sometimes have trouble paying attention or sitting still, especially for children. But people with ADHD have more severe symptoms that can sometimes cause serious problems, for example, failing grades for a child or a job loss for an adult. The symptoms are ongoing and may affect family and social life, too.
The exact cause of ADHD is unknown. ADHD probably results from a combination of factors, such as genetics and your environment. Researchers are looking at possible environmental factors that might raise the risk of developing ADHD. These factors include brain injuries, nutrition, and social environments.
The symptoms of ADHD depend on the type of ADHD a person has:
People with symptoms of attention problems may often:
Miss details or make careless mistakes in schoolwork, at work, or in other activitiesHave trouble staying focused on play activities or work tasksNot seem to listen when spoken to directlyFind it hard to follow instructions or finish tasks, or may start but get easily sidetrackedHave trouble being organized, keeping belongings in order, and managing timeAvoid doing tasks that require long periods of mental effortLose important items, such as books, wallets, keys, eyeglasses, and cellphonesForget about doing daily activities
People with symptoms of hyperactivity-impulsivity may often:
Fidget and squirm while seatedGet up when staying seated is expected, such as at school or workRun around or climb when it's not appropriate (children) or feel restless (teens and adults)Have trouble doing quiet activitiesBe constantly moving or "on the go"Talk much more than is normalBlurt out answers before questions are completedHave trouble waiting for their turnInterrupt others for example during conversations or games
People with combined ADHD show a mix of inattention and hyperactivity-impulsivity symptoms
There is no single test to diagnose ADHD. One step ofthe process for diagnosing ADHDinvolves having a physical exam, includingvision tests, hearing tests (forchildrenandadults), and other tests to rule out other problems with symptoms like ADHD. Other problems with similar symptoms includeanxiety,depression,sleep problems, and certain types oflearning disabilities.
The process also involves a thorough medical history and family history.  And it usually includes using standardized ADHD symptom checklists, questionnaires, and/or interview questions. These tools have rating scales (scoring systems) that help the provider see if a person's symptoms and history fit a diagnosis of ADHD.
To make a diagnosis of ADHD, the provider needs to have foundallof these things:
Several symptoms of ADHD that began before age 12.Several symptoms of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that have lasted for at least 6 months and cause serious problems:For children up to age 16, there must be at least 6 ongoing symptoms.For people 17 and older, there must be at least 5 ongoing symptoms.Symptoms that happen in 2 or more settings, for example, at home and at work or school.Symptoms that clearly get in the way of functioning well at school, work, and/or in social situations.Symptoms aren't caused by anothermental health disorder.
For children up to age 16, there must be at least 6 ongoing symptoms.For people 17 and older, there must be at least 5 ongoing symptoms.Symptoms that happen in 2 or more settings, for example, at home and at work or school.Symptoms that clearly get in the way of functioning well at school, work, and/or in social situations.Symptoms aren't caused by anothermental health disorder.
Although there is no cure for ADHD, treatments may help reduce symptoms and improve functioning. ADHD is commonly treated with:
Medicines.Psychotherapy (talk therapy), including behavior therapy.Education or training for parents to give them the skills and strategies to help their child. This is especially important for younger children.A combination of these treatments.
Good treatment plans will include close monitoring, follow-ups, and making changes, if needed, along the way.
Having a healthy lifestyle, such ashealthy eatingandregular exercise, may also help manage symptoms.
For school-aged children, school support is important. This could include classroom-based behavioral interventions such as behavior management plans or teaching your child organizational and study skills. It may also include accommodations such as specific seating in the classroom, reduced classwork, or extended time on tests and exams.
NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Teen Development
As a teenager, you go through many physical, mental, emotional, and social changes. The biggest change ispuberty, the process of becoming sexually mature.  It usually happens between ages 10 and 14 for girls and ages 12 and 16 for boys.   As your body changes, you may have questions aboutsexual health.
During this time, you start to develop your own unique personality and opinions.  Some changes that you might notice include:
Increased independence from your parentsMore concerns about body image and clothesMore influence from peersGreater ability to sense right and wrong
All of these changes can sometimes seem overwhelming.  Some sadness or moodiness can be normal.  But feeling very sad, hopeless, or worthless could be warning signs of amental health problem. If you need help, talk to your parents, school counselor, or health care provider.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Phobias
A phobia is a type ofanxiety disorder.  It is a strong, irrational fear of something that poses little or no real danger.
There are many specific phobias. Acrophobia is a fear of heights. Agoraphobia is a fear of public places, and claustrophobia is a fear of closed-in places. If you become anxious and extremely self-conscious in everyday social situations, you could have a social phobia. Other common phobias involve tunnels, highway driving, water, flying, animals and blood.
People with phobias try to avoid what they are afraid of. If they cannot, they may experience:
Panic and fearRapid heartbeatShortness of breathTremblingA strong desire to get away
Phobias usually start in children or teens, and continue into adulthood. The causes of specific phobias are not known, but they sometimes run in families.
Treatment helps most people with phobias. Options include medicines, therapy or both.
NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Alzheimer's Disease
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form ofdementiaamong older people. Dementia is a brain disorder that seriously affects thinking and memory skills. If you have AD, it can impair your ability to reason or learn new skills until it becomes difficult to complete daily activities.
AD begins slowly over many years. It first involves the parts of the brain that control thought, memory, and language. It may be mistaken for normal memory changes with aging. However, AD is not a normal part of aging. The brain changes from the disease lead to symptoms that get worse over time.
People with AD may have trouble remembering recent events or the names of people they know. Behavior may vary from person to person and day to day. AD progresses in stages.Late-onset ADoccurs in adults aged 65 and older, which is when most people develop the disease.Early-onset ADhappens before age 65, which is not common.
Some symptoms of AD can include:
Getting lost in familiar placesRepeating the same questionNot recognizing family membersHaving trouble speaking, reading, or writingNot taking care of yourself, such as not bathing or eating poorly
In AD, over time, symptoms get worse. Later on, people with AD may become anxious or aggressive or wander away from home. Eventually, they need total care. This can cause great stress for family members who mustcarefor them.
Researchers don't fully understand what causes AD. Age is the biggest risk factor. Your risk is also higher if a family member has had the disease. Although people who develop Alzheimer's don't always have a history of the disease in their families.
Researchers believe the causes of AD may be a combination of age-related changes in the brain, along with genetic, health, and lifestyle factors. Some medical conditions that are associated with a higher risk of AD include:
Hearing lossDepressionMild cognitive impairmentConcussionor othertraumatic brain injury(TBI)
A related problem, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), causes more memory problems than normal for people of the same age.  Many, but not all, people with MCI will develop AD.
Some health conditions can cause memory loss or symptoms like AD. Talk with your health care provider if you're having noticeable changes in your memory. To determine if your symptoms are related to AD and not normal aging or another health condition, your provider may:
Review your medical history and any medicines you're takingConduct tests to check your memory, thinking, and problem-solving skillsAsk about changes in behavior or personalityDo tests to rule out any medical or mental health conditionsRefer you to a provider that specializes in caring for older adultsRecommend a neurologist, a doctor who specializes in treating diseases of the brain and nervous system
No treatment can stop the disease. However, some medicines may help keep symptoms from getting worse for a limited time.
You can't change some risk factors, like your age. But changing certain lifestyle factors may promote your brain health and help you live a healthier lifestyle overall. This can include to:
Manage chronic health issues such ashigh blood pressureor hearing lossGet regular physical activityEat a healthy dietQuit smoking(or don't start)Get enough sleepDevelop strongsocial connections
NIH: National Institute on Aging

Memory
Every day, you have different experiences and you learn new things. Your brain cannot store all of that information, so it has to decide what is worth remembering. Memory is the process of storing and then remembering this information. There are different types of memory. Short-term memory stores information for a few seconds or minutes. Long-term memory stores it for a longer period of time.
Memory doesn't always work perfectly. As you grow older, it may take longer to remember things.
It's normal to forget things once in a while. We've all forgotten a name, where we put our keys, or if we locked the front door. If you are an older adult who forgets things more often than others your age, you may havemild cognitive impairment. Forgetting how to use your phone or find your way home may be signs of a more serious problem, such as:
Alzheimer's diseaseOther types ofdementiaStrokeDepressionHead injuriesBlood clotsortumorsin the brainKidney,liver, orthyroidproblemsReactions to certain medicines
If you're worried about your forgetfulness, see your health care provider.
NIH: National Institute on Aging

Eating Disorders
Eating disorders are serious mental health disorders. They involve severe problems with your thoughts about food and your eating behaviors. You may eat much less or much more than you need.
Eating disorders are medical conditions; they are not a lifestyle choice. They affect your body's ability to get proper nutrition. This can lead to health issues, such asheartandkidneyproblems, or sometimes even death. But there are treatments that can help.
Common types of eating disorders include:
Binge-eating, which is out-of-control eating. People with binge-eating disorder keep eating even after they are full. They often eat until they feel very uncomfortable. Afterward, they usually have feelings of guilt, shame, and distress. Eating too much too often can lead to weight gain andobesity. Binge-eating disorder is the most common eating disorder in the U.S.Bulimia nervosa.People with bulimia nervosa also have periods of binge-eating. But afterwards, they purge, by making themselves throw up or using laxatives. They may also over-exercise or fast. People with bulimia nervosa may be slightly underweight, normal weight, or overweight.Anorexia nervosa.People with anorexia nervosa avoid food, severely restrict food, or eat very small quantities of only certain foods. They may see themselves as overweight, even when they are dangerously underweight. Anorexia nervosa is the least common of the three eating disorders, but it is often the most serious. It has the highest death rate of any mental disorder.
The exact cause of eating disorders is unknown. Researchers believe that eating disorders are caused by a complex interaction of factors. These include genetic, biological, behavioral, psychological, and social factors.
Anyone can develop an eating disorder, but they are more common in women. Eating disorders frequently appear during the teen years or young adulthood. But people can also develop them during childhood or later in life.
The symptoms of eating disorders vary, depending on the disorder:
The symptoms ofbinge-eatinginclude:
Eating unusually large amounts of food in a specific amount of time, such as a 2-hour periodEating even when you're full or not hungryEating fast during binge episodesEating until you're uncomfortably fullEating alone or in secret to avoid embarrassmentFeeling distressed, ashamed, or guilty about your eatingFrequently dieting, possibly without weight loss
The symptoms ofbulimia nervosainclude the same symptoms as binge-eating, plus trying to get rid of the food or weight after binging by:
Purging, making yourself throw up or using laxatives or enemas to speed up the movement of food through your bodyDoing intensive and excessive exerciseFasting
Over time, bulimia nervosa can cause health problems such as:
Chronically inflamed andsore throatSwollen salivary glands in the neck and jaw areaWorn tooth enamel and increasingly sensitive anddecaying teeth. This is caused by the exposure to stomach acid every time you throw up.GERD(acid reflux) and other gastrointestinal problemsSevere dehydration from purgingElectrolyte imbalance, which could be too low or too high levels of sodium, calcium, potassium and other minerals. This can lead to astrokeorheart attack.
The symptoms ofanorexia nervosainclude:
Eating very little, to the point of starving yourselfIntensive and excessive exerciseExtreme thinnessIntense fear of gaining weightDistorted body image - seeing yourself as overweight even when you are severely underweight
Over time, anorexia nervosa can cause health problems such as:
Thinning of the bones (osteopenia orosteoporosis)MildanemiaMuscle wasting and weaknessThin, brittle hair and nailsDry, blotchy, or yellowish skinGrowth of fine hair all over the bodySevereconstipationLow blood pressureSlowed breathing and pulseFeeling cold all the time because of a drop in internal body temperatureFeeling faint,dizzy, or weakFeeling tired all the timeInfertilityDamage to the structure and function of the heartBrain damageMultiorgan failure
Anorexia nervosa can be fatal. Some people with this disorder die of complications from starvation, and others die ofsuicide.
Some people with eating disorders may also have othermental disorders(such asdepressionoranxiety) or problems withsubstance use.
Because eating disorders can be so serious, it is important to seek help if you or a loved one thinks that you might have a problem. Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis:
A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms. It is important to be honest about your eating and exercise behaviors so your provider can help you.A physical examBlood or urine tests to rule out other possible causes of your symptomsOther tests to see whether you have any other health problems caused by the eating disorder. These can includekidney function testsand anelectrocardiogram(EKG or ECG).
Treatment plans for eating disorders are tailored to individual needs. You will likely have a team of providers helping you, including doctors, nutritionists, nurses, and therapists. The treatments may include:
Individual, group, and/or family psychotherapy.Individual therapy may include cognitive behavioral approaches, which help you to identify and change negative and unhelpful thoughts. It also helps you build coping skills and change behavioral patterns.Medical care and monitoring,including care for the complications that eating disorders can causeNutrition counseling.Doctors, nurses, and counselors will help you eat healthy to reach and maintain a healthy weight.Medicines,such asantidepressants, antipsychotics, or mood stabilizers, may help treat some eating disorders. The medicines can also help with the depression and anxiety symptoms that often go along with eating disorders.
Some people with serious eating disorders may need to be in a hospital or in a residential treatment program. Residential treatment programs combine housing and treatment services.
NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Antidepressants
Antidepressants are prescription medicines to treat depression.Depressionis more than feeling a little sad or "blue" for a few days. It's a very common, serious medical illness that affects your mood and generalmental healthIt can make you feel tired, hopeless, worried, or fearful. It can change your thinking, sleeping, and eating. Depression may make some people think about ending their lives.
But antidepressants can help many people who have depression. Researchers think antidepressants may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress.
A health care provider may prescribe antidepressants foranxiety,chronic pain, orinsomnia. Sometimes providers also prescribe antidepressants for other conditions.
There are many types of antidepressants. Each one works differently. Providers usually prescribe newer antidepressants first because they don't cause as many side effects as older types. They also seem to help more kinds of depression and anxiety problems.
Most of the newer antidepressants belong to one of these three groups:
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs)Atypical antidepressants, which are newer antidepressants that don't fit into the other groups
If these antidepressants don't help, your provider might suggest one of the older antidepressants. The older types include tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), tetracyclics, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). Even though these antidepressants may cause more serious side effects, the benefits may outweigh the risks for some people.
Our bodies and brains all work differently. That means one antidepressant won't work for everyone.  You may need to try two or more medicines before you find one that works for you.
Your provider will work with you to choose the best option to try first. You'll consider questions such as:
Which symptoms bother you most?Some antidepressants may do a better job helping specific symptoms, such as trouble sleeping.What other medicines and supplements do you take?Some antidepressants can cause problems if you take them with certain medicines and herbs.Did a certain antidepressant work well for a close relative?An antidepressant that helped a parent, brother, or sister could be a good choice for you, too.Do you have other health conditions?Certain antidepressants can make some other conditions better or worse. Any other conditions that you have will be part of choosing your depression treatment.Are you pregnant, planning for pregnancy, or breastfeeding?If so, your provider will help you find a way to treat your depression that's safe for you and your baby.
Antidepressants usually take 4 to 8 weeks to work, so you'll need to be patient. You may notice that some problems, such as sleeping and eating, get better before your mood improves. That's a good sign. You may just need to give the medicine a little more time to do its job.
Sometimes an antidepressant helps at first, but symptoms return while you're still taking it. But there's usually another one you can try. To get more relief from depression, your provider may suggest combining two antidepressants, using another kind of medicine with an antidepressant, or adding talk therapy or other approachesto improve your mental health.
When an antidepressant starts to work, you and your provider can decide how long you need to stay on it. The typical length of treatment is 6 to 12 months, but some people may stay on antidepressants for much longer.
Not everyone has side effects from antidepressants. But if you do have them, they're usually mild and may get better over time as your body gets used to the new medicine.
The most common side effects from antidepressants include:
Nausea and vomitingWeight gainDiarrheaSleepinessSexual problems, such as a lack of desire or ability to have sex
When thinking about side effects, it's important to remember that there are also risks from not treating depression. Your provider can help you think through the pros and cons of all your options.
If you have any side effects from antidepressants, your provider may suggest ways to manage them while you wait to see if the antidepressant will work. If the side effects bother you too much, you may need to change antidepressants. But you should never change your dose or stop taking an antidepressant on your own.
If you have serious problems or notice any changes that worry you, such as new or worsening symptoms, unusual changes in your mood, or you start acting differently, call your provider right away.
In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 may be more likely to think about hurting or killing themselves when starting antidepressants or when the dose is changed. Get medical help right away if this happens.
Antidepressants are generally safe when you use them correctly:
Tell your provider about everything you take.That includes medicines, herbs, supplements, and over-the-counter medicines you take, such as pain relievers and decongestants. Be honest aboutrecreational drugsand alcohol, too.Try to get all your medicines from the same pharmacy.That way the pharmacist can warn you and your provider if you take medicines that may cause problems when used together.Follow all instructions about how to take your medicine.Talk with your provider if side effects bother you.Never stop taking antidepressants without your provider's help.Stopping too fast may make depression come back. You could even make your condition worse. To stop antidepressants safely, you need to give your body time to get used to being without the medicine. Your provider can tell you the safest way to go off an antidepressant.
NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Personality Disorders
Your personality is your own way of thinking, feeling, behaving, and relating to others. Once you become an adult, your personality usually doesn't change much.
Personality disorders are a group ofmental disorders. They involve long-term patterns of thoughts and behaviors that are different from what is considered normal in your culture. The thoughts and behaviors are unhealthy and inflexible. They cause serious problems with relationships, work, and social activities. They can make it hard to deal with everyday stresses and problems.
There are 10 types of personality disorders. They are grouped into three different categories called clusters. The types in each cluster have some similar symptoms and characteristics. The clusters and types are:
Cluster Apersonality disorders involve unusual and odd thoughts and behaviors. It includes:
Paranoid personality disorder,in which a person has paranoia (an extreme fear and distrust of others). They may think that someone is trying to harm them.Schizoid personality disorder,in which a person prefers to be alone and is not interested in having relationships with others.Schizotypal personality disorder,in which a person has unusual thoughts and ways of behaving and speaking. They are uncomfortable having close relationships with others.
Cluster Bpersonality disorders involve dramatic and emotional thoughts and behaviors that can keep changing. It includes:
Antisocial personality disorder,in which a person has a long-term pattern of manipulating, exploiting, or violating the rights of others.Borderline personality disorder,in which a person has lots of trouble managing their emotions. This makes them impulsive and uncertain about how they see themselves. It can cause a lot of trouble in their relationships.Histrionic personality disorder,in which a person is dramatic, has strong emotions, and always wants attention from others.Narcissistic personality disorder,in which a person lacks empathy and wants to be admired by others. They think that they are better than others and that they deserve special treatment.
Cluster Cpersonality disorders involve anxious and fearful thoughts and behaviors. It includes:
Avoidant personality disorder,in which a person is very shy and feels that they are not as good as others. They often avoid people because they fear rejection.Dependent personality disorder,in which a person depends too much on others and feels that they need to be taken care of. They may let others treat them badly because they are afraid of losing the relationship.Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder,in which a person needs control and order. They are perfectionists and can be inflexible. Although some of the symptoms are similar, this is not the same thing asobsessive-compulsive disorder(OCD).
Personality disorders usually begin when someone is in their teens or early adult years. The cause is unknown. However, genes and childhood experiences such asabuseand trauma likely play a role.
The symptoms of each personality disorder are different. But each disorder involves problems and uncertainty with how people see themselves. The disorders also cause problems in relationships with other people.
People with personality disorders may have trouble realizing that they have a problem. To them, their thoughts are normal. They may see others as the problem. So they may not seek help when they need it. Or, if they seek help, it may be because of another reason. They may be looking for help because of other mental health symptoms or problems with relationships and work. Sometimes someone else, such as a family member or social agency, may ask them to get help.
A mental health care provider can diagnose personality disorders. A mental health provider is a health care professional who specializes in diagnosing and treating mental health problems. To make a diagnosis, the provider will consider the person's symptoms, experiences, and family medical history. A thorough medical exam may also be done to help rule out other possible causes of the symptoms.
Talk therapy, also known as psychotherapy, is the main treatment for personality disorders. Medicines may help relieve certain symptoms, such asanxietyor mood swings.

Anxiety
Anxiety is a feeling of fear, dread, and uneasiness. It might cause you to sweat, feel restless and tense, and have a rapid heartbeat.   It can be a normal reaction to stress. For example, you might feel anxious when faced with a difficult problem at work, before taking a test, or before making an important decision. It can help you to cope. The anxiety may give you a boost of energy or help you focus. But for people with anxiety disorders, the fear is not temporary and can be overwhelming.
Anxiety disorders are conditions in which you have anxiety that does not go away and can get worse over time. The symptoms can interfere with daily activities such as job performance, schoolwork, and relationships.
There are several types of anxiety disorders, including:
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).People with GAD worry about ordinary issues such as health, money, work, and family. But their worries are excessive, and they have them almost every day for at least 6 months.Panic disorder.People with panic disorder have panic attacks. These are sudden, repeated periods of intense fear when there is no danger. The attacks come on quickly and can last several minutes or more.Phobias.People with phobias have an intense fear of something that poses little or no actual danger. Their fear may be about spiders, flying, going to crowded places, or being in social situations (known as social anxiety).
The cause of anxiety is unknown. Factors such as genetics, brain biology and chemistry,stress, and your environment may play a role.
The risk factors for the different types of anxiety disorders can vary. For example, GAD and phobias are more common in women, but social anxiety affects men and women equally. There are some general risk factors for all types of anxiety disorders, including:
Certain personality traits, such as being shy or withdrawn when you are in new situations or meeting new peopleTraumatic events in early childhood or adulthoodFamily history of anxiety or othermental disordersSome physical health conditions, such asthyroid problemsorarrhythmia
The different types of anxiety disorders can have different symptoms. But they all have a combination of:
Anxious thoughts or beliefs that are hard to control. They make you feel restless and tense and interfere with your daily life. They do not go away and can get worse over time.Physical symptoms, such as a pounding or rapid heartbeat, unexplained aches and pains,dizziness, andshortness of breathChanges in behavior, such as avoiding everyday activities you used to do
Usingcaffeine, other substances, and certain medicines can make your symptoms worse.
To diagnose anxiety disorders, your health care provider will ask about your symptoms and medical history. You may also have a physical exam and lab tests to make sure that a different health problem is not the cause of your symptoms.
If you don't have another health problem, you will get apsychological evaluation. Your provider may do it, or you may be referred to a mental health professional to get one.
The main treatments for anxiety disorders are psychotherapy (talk therapy), medicines, or both:
Psychotherapycan help you recognize and change troubling emotions, thoughts, and behaviors. To be effective, it should focus on your specific anxieties and needs. There are many types; some of the types used for anxiety disorders include:Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT),which teaches you different ways of thinking and behaving. It can help you change how you react to the things that cause you to feel fear and anxiety. It may include exposure therapy. This therapy focuses on having you confront your fears so that you will be able to do the things that you had been avoiding.Acceptance and commitment therapymay help with some anxiety disorders. It uses strategies such as mindfulness and goal setting to reduce discomfort and anxiety.Medicinesto treat anxiety disorders include anti-anxiety medicines and certainantidepressants. Some types of medicines may work better for specific types of anxiety disorders. You should work closely with your provider to identify which medicine is best for you. You may need to try more than one medicine before you can find the right one.
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT),which teaches you different ways of thinking and behaving. It can help you change how you react to the things that cause you to feel fear and anxiety. It may include exposure therapy. This therapy focuses on having you confront your fears so that you will be able to do the things that you had been avoiding.Acceptance and commitment therapymay help with some anxiety disorders. It uses strategies such as mindfulness and goal setting to reduce discomfort and anxiety.
Support groups and stress management techniques may also be helpful.
NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Autism Spectrum Disorder
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurological and developmental disorder that begins early in childhood and lasts throughout a person's life. It affects how a person acts and interacts with others, communicates, and learns.  It includes what used to be known as Asperger syndrome and pervasive developmental disorders.
It is called a "spectrum" disorder because people with ASD can have a range of symptoms. People with ASD might have problems talking with you, or they might not look you in the eye when you talk to them.  They may also have restricted interests and repetitive behaviors.  They may spend a lot of time putting things in order, or they may say the same sentence again and again. They may often seem to be in their "own world."
At well-child checkups, the health care provider should check your child's development.  If there are signs of ASD, your child will have a comprehensive evaluation.  It may include a team of specialists, doing various tests and evaluations to make a diagnosis.
The causes of ASD are not known.  Research suggests that both genes and environment play important roles.
There is currently no one standard treatment for ASD.  There are many ways to increase your child's ability to grow and learn new skills.  Starting them early can lead to better results.  Treatments include behavior and communication therapies, skills training, and medicines to control symptoms.
NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Autism Spectrum Disorder
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurological and developmental disorder that begins early in childhood and lasts throughout a person's life. It affects how a person acts and interacts with others, communicates, and learns.  It includes what used to be known as Asperger syndrome and pervasive developmental disorders.
It is called a "spectrum" disorder because people with ASD can have a range of symptoms. People with ASD might have problems talking with you, or they might not look you in the eye when you talk to them.  They may also have restricted interests and repetitive behaviors.  They may spend a lot of time putting things in order, or they may say the same sentence again and again. They may often seem to be in their "own world."
At well-child checkups, the health care provider should check your child's development.  If there are signs of ASD, your child will have a comprehensive evaluation.  It may include a team of specialists, doing various tests and evaluations to make a diagnosis.
The causes of ASD are not known.  Research suggests that both genes and environment play important roles.
There is currently no one standard treatment for ASD.  There are many ways to increase your child's ability to grow and learn new skills.  Starting them early can lead to better results.  Treatments include behavior and communication therapies, skills training, and medicines to control symptoms.
NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Postpartum Depression
Many women have the baby blues after childbirth. If you have the baby blues, you may have mood swings, feel sad, anxious or overwhelmed, have crying spells, lose your appetite, or have trouble sleeping. The baby blues most often go away within a few days or a week. The symptoms are not severe and do not need treatment.
The symptoms of postpartum depression last longer and are more severe.   You may also feel hopeless and worthless and lose interest in the baby. You may have thoughts of hurting yourself or the baby. Very rarely, new mothers develop something even more serious. They may have hallucinations or try to hurt themselves or the baby. They need to get treatment right away, often in the hospital.
Postpartum depression can begin anytime within the first year after childbirth. The cause is unknown. Hormonal and physical changes after birth and the stress of caring for a new baby may play a role. Women who have had depression are at higher risk.
If you think you have postpartum depression, tell your health care provider. Medicines, includingantidepressants, and talk therapy can help you get well.
Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

Bipolar Disorder
Bipolar disorder is amood disorderthat can cause intense mood swings:
Sometimes you may feel extremely "up," elated, irritable, or energized. This is called amanic episode.Other times you may feel "down," sad, indifferent, or hopeless. This is called adepressive episode.You may have both manic and depressive symptoms together. This is called amixed episode.
Along with mood swings, bipolar disorder causes changes in behavior, energy levels, and activity levels.
Bipolar disorder used to be called other names, including manic depression and manic-depressive disorder.
There are three main types of bipolar disorder:
Bipolar I disorderinvolves manic episodes that last at least 7 days or manic symptoms so severe that you need immediate hospital care. Depressive episodes are also common. Those often last at least two weeks. This type of bipolar disorder can also involve mixed episodes.Bipolar II disorderinvolves depressive episodes. But instead of full-blown manic episodes, there are episodes of hypomania. Hypomania is a less severe version of mania.Cyclothymic disorder, or cyclothymia, also involves hypomanic and depressive symptoms. But they are not as intense or as long-lasting as hypomanic or depressive episodes. The symptoms usually last for at least two years in adults and for one year in children and teenagers.
With any of these types, having four or more episodes of mania or depression in a year is called "rapid cycling."
The exact cause of bipolar disorder is unknown. Several factors likely play a role in the disorder. They includegenetics, brain structure and function, and your environment.
You are at higher risk for bipolar disorder if you have a close relative who has it. Going through trauma or stressful life events may raise this risk even more.
The symptoms of bipolar disorder can vary. But they involve mood swings known as mood episodes:
The symptoms of amanic episodecan includeFeeling very up, high, or elatedFeeling jumpy or wired, more active than usualHaving a very short temper or seeming extremely irritableHaving racing thoughts and talking very fastNeeding less sleepFeeling like you are unusually important, talented, or powerfulDo risky things that show poor judgment, such as eating and drinking too much, spending or giving away a lot of money, or having reckless sexThe symptoms of adepressive episodecan includeFeeling very sad, hopeless, or worthlessFeeling lonely or isolating yourself from othersTalking very slowly, feeling like you have nothing to say, or forgetting a lotHaving little energySleeping too muchEating too much or too littleLack of interest in your usual activities and being unable to do even simple thingsThinking about death or suicideThe symptoms of amixed episodeinclude both manic and depressive symptoms together. For example, you may feel very sad, empty, or hopeless, while at the same time feeling extremely energized.
Feeling very up, high, or elatedFeeling jumpy or wired, more active than usualHaving a very short temper or seeming extremely irritableHaving racing thoughts and talking very fastNeeding less sleepFeeling like you are unusually important, talented, or powerfulDo risky things that show poor judgment, such as eating and drinking too much, spending or giving away a lot of money, or having reckless sex
Feeling very sad, hopeless, or worthlessFeeling lonely or isolating yourself from othersTalking very slowly, feeling like you have nothing to say, or forgetting a lotHaving little energySleeping too muchEating too much or too littleLack of interest in your usual activities and being unable to do even simple thingsThinking about death or suicide
Some people with bipolar disorder may have milder symptoms. For example, you may have hypomania instead of mania. With hypomania, you may feel very good and find that you can get a lot done. You may not feel like anything is wrong. But your family and friends may notice your mood swings and changes in activity levels. They may realize that your behavior is unusual for you. After the hypomania, you might have severe depression.
Your mood episodes may last a week or two or sometimes longer. During an episode, symptoms usually occur every day for most of the day.
To diagnose bipolar disorder, your health care provider may use many tools:
A physical examA medical history, which will include asking about your symptoms, lifetime history, experiences, and family historyMedical tests to rule out other conditionsA mental health evaluation. Your provider may do the evaluation or may refer you to a mental health specialist to get one.
Treatment can help many people, including those with the most severe forms of bipolar disorder. The main treatments for bipolar disorder include medicines, psychotherapy, or both:
Medicinescan help control the symptoms of bipolar disorder. You may need to try several different medicines to find which one works best for you. Some people need to take more than one medicine. It's important to take your medicine consistently. Don't stop taking it without first talking with your provider.  Contact your provider if you have any concerns about side effects from the medicines.Psychotherapy(talk therapy) can help you recognize and change troubling emotions, thoughts, and behaviors. It can give you and your family support, education, skills, and coping strategies. There are several different types of psychotherapy that may help with bipolar disorder.Other treatment optionsinclude:Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT),a brain stimulation procedure that can help relieve symptoms. It uses a mild electric current and is done while you are under general anesthesia. ECT is most often used for severe bipolar disorder that is not getting better with other treatments. It may also be used when someone needs a treatment that will work more quickly than medicines. This might be when a person has a high risk of suicide or is catatonic (unresponsive).Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS),a brain stimulation procedure that uses magnetic waves to relieve depression. It is not as powerful as ECT, but with rTMS, you don't need general anesthesia. It also has a low risk of negative effects on your memory and thinking.Light therapyhas been shown to be effective for seasonal affective disorder (SAD). Many people with bipolar disorder also find that their depression gets worse during certain seasons, usually in the fall and winter. Light therapy may help with their symptoms.Healthy lifestyle changes,such as getting regular exercise, having a consistent sleep schedule, and keeping a mood journal, can also help with your symptoms.
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT),a brain stimulation procedure that can help relieve symptoms. It uses a mild electric current and is done while you are under general anesthesia. ECT is most often used for severe bipolar disorder that is not getting better with other treatments. It may also be used when someone needs a treatment that will work more quickly than medicines. This might be when a person has a high risk of suicide or is catatonic (unresponsive).Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS),a brain stimulation procedure that uses magnetic waves to relieve depression. It is not as powerful as ECT, but with rTMS, you don't need general anesthesia. It also has a low risk of negative effects on your memory and thinking.Light therapyhas been shown to be effective for seasonal affective disorder (SAD). Many people with bipolar disorder also find that their depression gets worse during certain seasons, usually in the fall and winter. Light therapy may help with their symptoms.Healthy lifestyle changes,such as getting regular exercise, having a consistent sleep schedule, and keeping a mood journal, can also help with your symptoms.
Bipolar disorder is a lifelong illness. But long-term, ongoing treatment can help manage your symptoms and enable you to live a healthy, successful life.
NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Bipolar Disorder
Bipolar disorder is amood disorderthat can cause intense mood swings:
Sometimes you may feel extremely "up," elated, irritable, or energized. This is called amanic episode.Other times you may feel "down," sad, indifferent, or hopeless. This is called adepressive episode.You may have both manic and depressive symptoms together. This is called amixed episode.
Along with mood swings, bipolar disorder causes changes in behavior, energy levels, and activity levels.
Bipolar disorder used to be called other names, including manic depression and manic-depressive disorder.
There are three main types of bipolar disorder:
Bipolar I disorderinvolves manic episodes that last at least 7 days or manic symptoms so severe that you need immediate hospital care. Depressive episodes are also common. Those often last at least two weeks. This type of bipolar disorder can also involve mixed episodes.Bipolar II disorderinvolves depressive episodes. But instead of full-blown manic episodes, there are episodes of hypomania. Hypomania is a less severe version of mania.Cyclothymic disorder, or cyclothymia, also involves hypomanic and depressive symptoms. But they are not as intense or as long-lasting as hypomanic or depressive episodes. The symptoms usually last for at least two years in adults and for one year in children and teenagers.
With any of these types, having four or more episodes of mania or depression in a year is called "rapid cycling."
The exact cause of bipolar disorder is unknown. Several factors likely play a role in the disorder. They includegenetics, brain structure and function, and your environment.
You are at higher risk for bipolar disorder if you have a close relative who has it. Going through trauma or stressful life events may raise this risk even more.
The symptoms of bipolar disorder can vary. But they involve mood swings known as mood episodes:
The symptoms of amanic episodecan includeFeeling very up, high, or elatedFeeling jumpy or wired, more active than usualHaving a very short temper or seeming extremely irritableHaving racing thoughts and talking very fastNeeding less sleepFeeling like you are unusually important, talented, or powerfulDo risky things that show poor judgment, such as eating and drinking too much, spending or giving away a lot of money, or having reckless sexThe symptoms of adepressive episodecan includeFeeling very sad, hopeless, or worthlessFeeling lonely or isolating yourself from othersTalking very slowly, feeling like you have nothing to say, or forgetting a lotHaving little energySleeping too muchEating too much or too littleLack of interest in your usual activities and being unable to do even simple thingsThinking about death or suicideThe symptoms of amixed episodeinclude both manic and depressive symptoms together. For example, you may feel very sad, empty, or hopeless, while at the same time feeling extremely energized.
Feeling very up, high, or elatedFeeling jumpy or wired, more active than usualHaving a very short temper or seeming extremely irritableHaving racing thoughts and talking very fastNeeding less sleepFeeling like you are unusually important, talented, or powerfulDo risky things that show poor judgment, such as eating and drinking too much, spending or giving away a lot of money, or having reckless sex
Feeling very sad, hopeless, or worthlessFeeling lonely or isolating yourself from othersTalking very slowly, feeling like you have nothing to say, or forgetting a lotHaving little energySleeping too muchEating too much or too littleLack of interest in your usual activities and being unable to do even simple thingsThinking about death or suicide
Some people with bipolar disorder may have milder symptoms. For example, you may have hypomania instead of mania. With hypomania, you may feel very good and find that you can get a lot done. You may not feel like anything is wrong. But your family and friends may notice your mood swings and changes in activity levels. They may realize that your behavior is unusual for you. After the hypomania, you might have severe depression.
Your mood episodes may last a week or two or sometimes longer. During an episode, symptoms usually occur every day for most of the day.
To diagnose bipolar disorder, your health care provider may use many tools:
A physical examA medical history, which will include asking about your symptoms, lifetime history, experiences, and family historyMedical tests to rule out other conditionsA mental health evaluation. Your provider may do the evaluation or may refer you to a mental health specialist to get one.
Treatment can help many people, including those with the most severe forms of bipolar disorder. The main treatments for bipolar disorder include medicines, psychotherapy, or both:
Medicinescan help control the symptoms of bipolar disorder. You may need to try several different medicines to find which one works best for you. Some people need to take more than one medicine. It's important to take your medicine consistently. Don't stop taking it without first talking with your provider.  Contact your provider if you have any concerns about side effects from the medicines.Psychotherapy(talk therapy) can help you recognize and change troubling emotions, thoughts, and behaviors. It can give you and your family support, education, skills, and coping strategies. There are several different types of psychotherapy that may help with bipolar disorder.Other treatment optionsinclude:Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT),a brain stimulation procedure that can help relieve symptoms. It uses a mild electric current and is done while you are under general anesthesia. ECT is most often used for severe bipolar disorder that is not getting better with other treatments. It may also be used when someone needs a treatment that will work more quickly than medicines. This might be when a person has a high risk of suicide or is catatonic (unresponsive).Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS),a brain stimulation procedure that uses magnetic waves to relieve depression. It is not as powerful as ECT, but with rTMS, you don't need general anesthesia. It also has a low risk of negative effects on your memory and thinking.Light therapyhas been shown to be effective for seasonal affective disorder (SAD). Many people with bipolar disorder also find that their depression gets worse during certain seasons, usually in the fall and winter. Light therapy may help with their symptoms.Healthy lifestyle changes,such as getting regular exercise, having a consistent sleep schedule, and keeping a mood journal, can also help with your symptoms.
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT),a brain stimulation procedure that can help relieve symptoms. It uses a mild electric current and is done while you are under general anesthesia. ECT is most often used for severe bipolar disorder that is not getting better with other treatments. It may also be used when someone needs a treatment that will work more quickly than medicines. This might be when a person has a high risk of suicide or is catatonic (unresponsive).Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS),a brain stimulation procedure that uses magnetic waves to relieve depression. It is not as powerful as ECT, but with rTMS, you don't need general anesthesia. It also has a low risk of negative effects on your memory and thinking.Light therapyhas been shown to be effective for seasonal affective disorder (SAD). Many people with bipolar disorder also find that their depression gets worse during certain seasons, usually in the fall and winter. Light therapy may help with their symptoms.Healthy lifestyle changes,such as getting regular exercise, having a consistent sleep schedule, and keeping a mood journal, can also help with your symptoms.
Bipolar disorder is a lifelong illness. But long-term, ongoing treatment can help manage your symptoms and enable you to live a healthy, successful life.
NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Cancer--Living with Cancer
Canceris a common disease. Many Americans will be diagnosed with cancer during their lifetimes. Even though cancer may be life-threatening, many people have successful treatment. Others live with cancer for a very long time.
For most people with cancer, learning to live with the disease is one of the biggest challenges they've ever faced. That's because having cancer touches just about every part of your life and the lives of those around you.
Cancer and its treatment may change:
Your daily routines and ability to workYour important relationshipsThe way you look, feel, and think about yourself
If you learn what to expect, you may feel more in control and prepared to cope with these changes. Your health care provider can help you find information and support services that are right for you.
Having cancer may cause a range of strong emotions, such as sadness, anger, fear, worry, or guilt. These feelings are normal, and they're likely to change over time. It's helpful to sort out your feelings in a way that's comfortable for you. You might try:
Talking openly with someone you trustWriting about your feelingsUsing relaxation methods, such as meditation and othercomplementary and alternative medicine(CAM)Doing the things you enjoy,  giving yourself a break from focusing on cancer
If your emotions seem to take over your life, tell your provider. You may need extra support if you have symptoms ofdepression,stress,anxiety, orpanic disorder.
During cancer treatment, you usually have a team of providers. Along with doctors and nurses, you may be able to talk with social workers, pharmacists, dietitians, and other health professionals.
These professionals are prepared to help you deal with the issues that cancer brings up, including concerns aboutfinances. But it's up to you to let your team know what's on your mind.
Good communication with your providersmay help you feel more in control and satisfied with your care. Your communications may be better if you:
Tell your providers how much you want to know about your cancer and its treatment.Do you want all the details or just the big picture?Write down your questions and concerns before your visits.Bring a family member or a friend to your visits.This person can help by listening, taking notes, and asking questions.
Cancer changes the daily routines and roles of the people who love and support you. They may need to start doing the things you've always done for them. And you may need their help doing things you've always done for yourself. These changes can be difficult for everyone.
It may help to have an honest talk about changing roles and needs. If that sounds too hard, ask a social worker or another member of your care team to help you talk with family and friends who are helping with your care.  Thesecaregivers may need some support, too.
Cancer and its treatment may cause some big changes in how you look, feel, and think about yourself. For example, you may have:
Less energyTemporary or permanent changes in your body, such asscars, orhair lossfromchemotherapyProblems being sexually closeor doubts about dating
Coping with these changes can be hard. But most people findways to feel more positiveover time. If you feel well enough, you might try:
Exercise.Walking, yoga, or other types of movement may help you feel stronger and more in control of your body. But check with your provider first.Staying involved in life and helping others.Think about volunteering, hobbies, or other activities that might make you feel good about yourself.Counseling for sexual problems.Talking with a professional, either with a partner or on your own, may help.
After treatment, you'll have regular cancer follow-up care. Your provider will explain the schedule of checkups and tests you'll need. This is a good time to discuss the challenges you may face ahead. Knowing what to expect may help you make plans as you find a "new normal" with cancer as part of your life.
NIH: National Cancer Institute

Child Behavior Disorders
All kids misbehave some times. And some may have temporary behavior problems due to stress. For example, the birth of a sibling, a divorce, or a death in the family may cause a child to act out. Behavior disorders are more serious. They involve a pattern of hostile, aggressive, or disruptive behaviors for more than 6 months.  The behavior is also not appropriate for the child's age.
Warning signs can include:
Harming or threatening themselves, other people or petsDamaging or destroying propertyLying or stealingNot doing well in school, skipping schoolEarly smoking, drinking or drug useEarly sexual activityFrequent tantrums and argumentsConsistent hostility toward authority figures
If you see signs of a problem, ask for help. Poor choices can become habits. Kids who have behavior problems are at higher risk for school failure,mental health problems, and evensuicide. Classes or family therapy may help parents learn to set and enforce limits. Talk therapy and behavior therapy for your child can also help.

Child Mental Health
It's important to recognize and treat mental illnesses in children early on.  Once mental illness develops, it becomes a regular part of your child's behavior. This makes it more difficult to treat.
But it's not always easy to know when your child has a serious problem. Everyday stresses can cause changes in your child's behavior. For example, getting a new brother or sister or going to a new school may cause a child to temporarily act out. Warning signs that it might be a more serious problem include:
Problems in more than one setting (at school, at home, with peers)Changes in appetite or sleepSocial withdrawal or fear of things he or she did not used to be not afraid ofReturning to behaviors more common in younger children, such as bedwettingSigns of being upset, such as sadness or tearfulnessSigns of self-destructive behavior, such as head-banging or suddenly getting hurt oftenRepeated thoughts of death
To diagnose mental health problems, the doctor or mental health specialist looks at your child's signs and symptoms, medical history, and family history. Treatments include medicines and talk therapy.
NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Coping with Chronic Illness
Having a long-term, or chronic, illness can disrupt your life in many ways. You may often be tired and inpain. Your illness might affect your appearance or your physical abilities and independence. You may not be able to work, causing financial problems. For children, chronic illnesses can be frightening, because they may not understand why this is happening to them.
These changes can cause stress, anxiety, and anger. If they do, it is important to seek help. A trained counselor can help you develop strategies to regain a feeling of control. Support groups might help, too. You will find that you are not alone, and you may learn some new tips on how to cope.
You may be able to manage your illness better if you learn more about it. It is important toevaluate the informationthat you find, to make sure that it is reliable. It is also important tofind a health care providerthat you can trust.

Compulsive Gambling
Many people enjoy gambling, whether it's betting on a horse or playing poker on the Internet. Most people who gamble don't have a problem, but some lose control of their gambling. Signs of problem gambling include :
Always thinking about gamblingLying about gamblingSpending work or family time gamblingFeeling bad after you gamble, but not quittingGambling with money you need for other things
If you have concerns about your gambling, ask for help. Your health care provider can work with you to find the treatment that's best for you.
NIH: National Institutes of Health
Compulsive Gambling(Medical Encyclopedia)Also inSpanishCompulsive Gambling(Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research)Also inSpanishHelp for Mental Illnesses(National Institute of Mental Health)Also inSpanishNational Institute of Mental HealthAlso inSpanishTeen Gambling(American Academy of Pediatrics)Also inSpanish
ClinicalTrials.gov: Gambling(National Institutes of Health)
Article: What is known about gambling in lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans and...Article: Understanding well-being among gamblers: The role of co-occurring psychopathology.Article: The impact of prior online gaming experience on the migration of...Compulsive Gambling -- see more articles
FindTreatment.gov(Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration)Also inSpanish
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
About MedlinePlusWhat's NewSite MapCustomer Support
Subscribe to RSSConnect with NLM
NLM Web PoliciesCopyrightAccessibilityGuidelines for LinksViewers & PlayersHHS Vulnerability DisclosureMedlinePlus Connect for EHRsFor Developers

Child Behavior Disorders
All kids misbehave some times. And some may have temporary behavior problems due to stress. For example, the birth of a sibling, a divorce, or a death in the family may cause a child to act out. Behavior disorders are more serious. They involve a pattern of hostile, aggressive, or disruptive behaviors for more than 6 months.  The behavior is also not appropriate for the child's age.
Warning signs can include:
Harming or threatening themselves, other people or petsDamaging or destroying propertyLying or stealingNot doing well in school, skipping schoolEarly smoking, drinking or drug useEarly sexual activityFrequent tantrums and argumentsConsistent hostility toward authority figures
If you see signs of a problem, ask for help. Poor choices can become habits. Kids who have behavior problems are at higher risk for school failure,mental health problems, and evensuicide. Classes or family therapy may help parents learn to set and enforce limits. Talk therapy and behavior therapy for your child can also help.

Coping with Disasters
No matter how well you haveprepared, you might feel dazed or numb after going through a disaster. You may also feel sad, helpless, or anxious. In spite of the tragedy, you might just feel happy to be alive.
It is not unusual to have bad memories or dreams. You may avoid places or people that remind you of the disaster. You might have trouble sleeping, eating, or paying attention. Many people have short tempers and get angry easily. These are all normal reactions tostress.
Sometimes the stress can be too much to handle alone. Some people have long-term problems after a disaster, including:
Post-traumatic stress disorderDepressionSelf-blameSuicidal thoughtsAlcohol or drug misuse
If your emotional reactions are getting in the way of your relationships, work, or other important activities, talk to a counselor or your health care provider. Treatments are available.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Common Reactions After Trauma(National Center for PTSD)Also inSpanishCoping Tips for Traumatic Events and Disasters(Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration)DisasterAssistance.gov(Department of Homeland Security)Also inSpanishEffects of Disaster Events: Resilience and Risk Factors(National Center for PTSD)Emergency Preparedness and Response(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Federal Emergency Management AgencyAlso inSpanishHelping Children and Adolescents Cope With Traumatic Events(National Institute of Mental Health)Also inSpanishHow to Talk With Kids About Tragedies & Other Traumatic News Events
Article: Investigation of Religious Coping and Psychological Resilience Levels of Women Survivors...Article: Coping with role conflict and maintaining work self-efficacy: Strategies for working...Article: Assessment of university students' earthquake coping strategies using artificial intelligence methods.Coping with Disasters -- see more articles
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
About MedlinePlusWhat's NewSite MapCustomer Support
Subscribe to RSSConnect with NLM
NLM Web PoliciesCopyrightAccessibilityGuidelines for LinksViewers & PlayersHHS Vulnerability DisclosureMedlinePlus Connect for EHRsFor Developers

Self-Harm
Self-harm, or self-injury, is when a person hurts his or her own body on purpose. The injuries may be minor, but sometimes they can be severe. They may leave permanent scars or cause serious health problems. Some examples are:
Cutting yourself (such as using a razor blade, knife, or other sharp object to cut your skin)Punching yourself or punching things (like a wall)Burning yourself with cigarettes, matches, or candlesPulling out your hairPoking objects through body openingsBreaking your bones or bruising yourself
Self-harm is not a mental disorder. It is a behavior - an unhealthy way to cope with strong feelings. However, some of the people who harm themselves do have amental disorder.
People who harm themselves are usually not trying toattempt suicide.  But they are at higher risk of attempting suicide if they do not get help.
There are different reasons why people harm themselves. Often, they have trouble coping and dealing with their feelings. They harm themselves to try to:
Make themselves feel something (because they feel empty or numb inside)Block upsetting memoriesShow that they need helpRelease strong feelings that overwhelm them, such as anger, loneliness, or hopelessnessPunish themselvesFeel a sense of control
There are people of all ages who harm themselves, but it usually starts in the teen or early adult years. Self-harm is more common in people who:
Wereabusedor went through a trauma as childrenHave mental disorders, such asDepressionEating disordersPost-traumatic stress disorderCertainpersonality disordersMisusedrugsoralcoholHave friends who self-harmHave low self-esteem
DepressionEating disordersPost-traumatic stress disorderCertainpersonality disorders
Signs that someone may be hurting themselves include:
Having frequent cuts, bruises, or scarsWearing long sleeves or pants even in hot weatherMaking excuses about injuriesHaving sharp objects around for no clear reason
If someone you know is self-harming, it is important not to be judgmental. Let that person know that you want to help. If the person is a child or teenager, ask him or her to talk to a trusted adult. If he or she won't do that, talk to a trusted adult yourself. If the person who is self-harming is an adult, suggest mental health counseling.
There are no medicines to treat self-harming behaviors. But there are medicines to treat any mental disorders that the person may have, such asanxietyand depression. Treating the mental disorder may weaken the urge to self-harm.
Mental health counseling or therapy can also help by teaching the person:
Problem-solving skillsNew ways to cope with strong emotionsBetter relationship skillsWays to strengthen self-esteem
If the problem is severe, the person may need more intensive treatment in a psychiatric hospital or a mental health day program.

Mood Disorders
Most people feel sad or irritable from time to time. They may say they're in a bad mood. A mood disorder is different. It affects a person's everyday emotional state. Nearly one in ten people aged 18 and older have mood disorders. These includedepressionandbipolar disorder(also called manic depression).
Mood disorders can increase a person's risk for heart disease, diabetes, and other diseases. Treatments include medication, psychotherapy, or a combination of both. With treatment, most people with mood disorders can lead productive lives.

Delirium
Delirium is a mental state in which you are confused, disoriented, and not able to think or remember clearly. It usually starts suddenly. It is often temporary and treatable.
There are three types of delirium:
Hypoactive, when you are not active and seem sleepy, tired, or depressedHyperactive, when you are restless or agitatedMixed, when you change back and forth between being hypoactive and hyperactive
There are many different problems that can cause delirium. Some of the more common causes include:
Advancedcancer.Alcohol ordrugs, either from intoxication or withdrawal. This includes a serious type of alcohol withdrawal syndrome called delirium tremens. It usually happens to people who stop drinking after years ofalcohol use disorder (AUD).Dehydrationandelectrolyte imbalances.Dementia.Hospitalization, especially in intensive care.Infections, such asurinary tract infections,pneumonia, and theflu.Medicines.This could be aside effectof a medicine, such as sedatives oropioids. Or it could be from withdrawal after stopping a medicine.Metabolic disorders.Organ failure, such askidneyor liver failure.Poisoning.Serious illnesses.Severepain.Sleep deprivation.Surgeries, including reactions toanesthesia.
Certain factors put you at risk for delirium, including:
Being in a hospital or nursing homeHaving dementiaHaving a serious illness or more than one illnessHaving an infectionOlder ageHaving surgeryTaking medicines that affect the mind or behaviorTaking high doses ofpain medicines, such as opioids
The symptoms of delirium usually start suddenly, over a few hours or a few days. They often come and go. The most common symptoms include:
Changes in alertness (usually more alert in the morning, less at night)Changing levels of consciousnessConfusionDisorganized thinking, talking in a way that doesn't make senseDisrupted sleep patterns, sleepinessEmotional changes: anger, agitation,depression, irritability, overexcitementHallucinations and delusionsMemory problems, especially with short-term memoryTrouble concentrating
Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis:
A medical history, which includes asking about your symptomsPhysical and neurological examsMental status testing, which checks for problems with your thinking and alertnessLab anddiagnostic imagingtests
Delirium and dementia have similar symptoms, so it can be hard to tell them apart. You can also have both at the same time. The differences between them are that:
Deliriumstarts suddenly and can cause hallucinations. It is mainly a problem with attention and staying alert. The symptoms may get better or worse and can last for hours or weeks.Dementiadevelops slowly and does not cause hallucinations. It usually starts with memory loss. The symptoms don't change often, like they can with delirium. Dementia almost never gets better.
Treatment of delirium focuses on the causes and symptoms of delirium. The first step is to identify the cause. Often, treating the cause will lead to a full recovery. The recovery may take some time - weeks or sometimes even months. In the meantime, there may be treatments to manage the symptoms, such as:
Controlling the environment, which includes making sure that the room is quiet and well-lit, having clocks or calendars in view, and having family members aroundMedicines, including those that control aggression or agitation and pain relievers if there is painIf needed, making sure that the person has a hearing aid, glasses, or other devices for communication
Treating the conditions that can cause delirium may reduce the risk of getting it. Hospitals can help lower the risk of delirium by avoiding sedatives and making sure that hospital rooms are kept quiet, calm, and well-lit. It can also help to have family members around and to have the same staff members treat the person each day (if possible).
Delirium(AGS Health in Aging Foundation)Delirium(Merck & Co., Inc.)Also inSpanishDelirium: Cancer Treatment Side Effect(National Cancer Institute)Also inSpanishManaging Delirium in Older Adults(AGS Health in Aging Foundation)-PDFAlso inSpanishNational Institute of Neurological Disorders and StrokeWhat to Ask: Delirium(AGS Health in Aging Foundation)
ClinicalTrials.gov: Delirium(National Institutes of Health)
Article: Effect of perioperative music on delirium after hip fracture operations (MCHOPIN):...Article: A Pilot Randomized Controlled Trial Assessing the Feasibility and Acceptability of...Article: Detection of postoperative delirium by family and caregivers: Evaluation of the...Delirium -- see more articles
Delirium(Medical Encyclopedia)Also inSpanishDelirium tremens(Medical Encyclopedia)Also inSpanish
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
About MedlinePlusWhat's NewSite MapCustomer Support
Subscribe to RSSConnect with NLM
NLM Web PoliciesCopyrightAccessibilityGuidelines for LinksViewers & PlayersHHS Vulnerability DisclosureMedlinePlus Connect for EHRsFor Developers

Dementia
Dementia is a loss of mental functions that is severe enough to affect your daily life and activities. These functions include:
MemoryLanguage skillsVisual perception (your ability to make sense of what you see)Problem solvingTrouble with everyday tasksThe ability to focus and pay attention
It is normal to become a bit more forgetful as you age. But dementia is not a normal part of aging. It is a serious disorder that interferes with your daily life.
The most common types of dementia are known as neurodegenerative disorders. These are diseases in which the cells of the brain stop working or die. They include:
Alzheimer's disease, which is the most common form of dementia among older people. People with Alzheimer's have plaques and tangles in their brain. These are abnormal buildups of different proteins. Beta-amyloid protein clumps up and forms plaques in between your brain cells. Tau protein builds up and forms tangles inside the nerve cells of your brain. There is also a loss of connection between nerve cells in the brain.Lewy body dementia, which causes movement symptoms along with dementia. Lewy bodies are abnormal deposits of a protein in the brain.Frontotemporal disorders, which cause changes to certain parts of the brain:Changes in the frontal lobe lead to behavioral symptomsChanges in the temporal lobe lead to language and emotional disordersVascular dementia, which involves changes to the brain's blood supply. It is often caused by astrokeoratherosclerosis(hardening of the arteries) in the brain.Mixed dementia, which is a combination of two or more types of dementia. For example, some people have both Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia.
Changes in the frontal lobe lead to behavioral symptomsChanges in the temporal lobe lead to language and emotional disorders
Other conditions can cause dementia or dementia-like symptoms, including:
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, a rare brain disorderHuntington's disease, an inherited, progressive brain diseaseChronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), caused by repeatedtraumatic brain injuryHIV-associated dementia (HAD)
Certain factors can raise your risk for developing dementia, including:
Aging. This is the biggest risk factor for dementia.SmokingUncontrolleddiabetesHigh blood pressureDrinking too muchalcoholHaving close family members who have dementia
The symptoms of dementia can vary, depending on which parts of the brain are affected. Often, forgetfulness is the first symptom.  Dementia also causes problems with the ability to think, problem solve, and reason. For example, people with dementia may:
Get lost in a familiar neighborhoodUse unusual words to refer to familiar objectsForget the name of a close family member or friendForget old memoriesNeed help doing tasks that they used to do by themselves
Some people with dementia cannot control their emotions and their personalities may change. They may become apathetic, meaning that they are no longer interested in normal daily activities or events. They may lose their inhibitions and stop caring about other peoples' feelings.
Certain types of dementia can also cause problems with balance and movement.
The stages of dementia range from mild to severe. In the mildest stage, it is just beginning to affect a person's functioning. In the most severe stage, the person is completely dependent on others for care.
Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis:
A medical history, which includes asking about your symptomsA physical examTests of your thinking, memory, and language abilitiesOther tests, such as blood tests,genetic tests, and brain scansAmental health evaluationto see whether amental disorderis contributing to your symptoms
There is no cure for most types of dementia, including Alzheimer's disease and Lewy body dementia. Treatments may help to maintain mental function longer, manage behavioral symptoms, and slow down the symptoms of disease. They may include:
Medicines, which may temporarily improve memory and thinking or slow down their decline. They only work in some people. Other medicines can treat symptoms such as anxiety, depression, sleep problems, and muscle stiffness. Some of these medicines can cause strong side effects in people with dementia. It is important to talk to your health care provider about which medicines will be safe for you.Occupational therapyto help find ways to more easily do everyday activitiesSpeech therapyto help with swallowing difficulties and trouble speaking loudly and clearlyMental health counselingto help people with dementia and their families learn how to manage difficult emotions and behaviors. It can also help them plan for the future.Music or art therapyto reduce anxiety and improve well-being
Researchers have not found a proven way to prevent dementia. Living ahealthy lifestylemight influence some of your risk factors for dementia.

Depression
Depression is more than a feeling of being sad or irritable for a few days. It's a seriousmood disorder. As one of the most common mental disorders in the United States, depression can affect how you think, feel, and your everyday life. You may not know why you feel this way, but even basic daily activities such as sleeping, eating, or working may become difficult. Depression often needs long-term treatment but getting help at the earliest sign of a problem can help manage your symptoms.
The most common types of depression are major depression and persistent depressive disorder.
Major depressionsymptoms include a depressed mood or a loss of interest. Symptoms affect your daily activities and last for at least two weeks.Persistent depressive disorder(also called dysthymia or dysthymic disorder) has less severe depressive symptoms, but they last longer, usually for at least two years.
Other types of depression can include:
Seasonal affective disordercomes and goes with the seasons. It usually starts in late fall and early winter and goes away during the spring and summer.Bipolar disorderis sometimes called manic depression. This mood disorder can cause intense mood swings.Depression with symptoms of psychosisis a severe form of depression that also has delusions (false beliefs) or hallucinations (seeing, hearing, or feeling something that isn't there).
There are a variety of things that may cause depression, including genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors. Depression can happen at any age and can affect anyone, but it's more common in women. This is often due to the physical and hormonal changes that women have during menstruation, pregnancy,the postpartum period, and menopause. Other mental disorders or chronic medical conditions such asdiabetes,cancer, orheart diseasemay occur with depression. This may make the chronic condition or depression worse.
In some cases, there is no clear cause for depression.
You may be at a higher risk of depression if you have a close relative who has it or another mental health disorder. Going through trauma or stressful life events may raise your risk even more.
Depression doesn't look the same on everyone. The type and number of symptoms of depression can vary and don't always appear like sadness. Depression may affect you differently based on your:
Age.The symptoms of depression may be different in a child, who may appear more irritable than sad.Teensmay act out or have excessive sleepiness. The symptoms for an older adult may not be as obvious as other age groups.Sex.Men often show symptoms and coping behaviors differently than women. Rather than sad, men may appear angry or irritable.Medical conditions.Some medicines and medical conditions may cause symptoms that look like depression. Chronic conditions may make depression worse.
Symptoms of depression are ongoing and affect your day-to-day life. They can include:
Feeling sad or "empty"Losing interest in favorite activitiesOvereating, or not wanting to eat at allSleeping too much, or not enoughFeeling very tiredFeeling hopeless, irritable, anxious, or guiltyHaving aches and pains, headaches, cramps, or digestive problemsHaving thoughts of death orsuicideChanging moods or behaviorsIncreasing use of alcohol or drugsIsolating from family and friends
If you think you have depression, talk to your health care provider or a mental health provider. To be diagnosed with depression, your provider may use many tools:
A medical historywill include asking about your symptoms and family history. To be diagnosed with depression, your symptoms must occur most of the day, nearly every day, for at least two weeks. One of the symptoms must be a depressed mood or a loss of interest in most activities.Medical testsmay be done to rule out other medical conditions. Certain medicines and medical conditions (such as viruses orthyroid disorders) may cause symptoms like depression.A physical examto make sure another issue isn't causing your symptoms.Amental health evaluationby your provider or a mental health provider.
Depression may need long-term treatment. Most treatments include medicines and/or psychotherapy (talk therapy):
Medicinessuch asantidepressantsmay help control your symptoms. You may need to try several medicines to find which works best for you. Medicine may take time to work and can have side effects. Don't stop taking your medicine without first talking with your provider. Contact your provider if you have any concerns about side effects from the medicine.Psychotherapy(talk therapy) under the care of a mental health provider can help you recognize and change troubling emotions, thoughts, and behaviors. This may be done one-on-one or in a group setting. It can give you and your family support, education, skills, and coping strategies.Light therapyhas been shown to be effective for seasonal affective disorder (SAD).Other treatments optionsmay be considered if treatment isn't working or if depression is severe. These may include:Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)is a brain stimulation procedure that uses a mild electric current when you are under general anesthesia. ECT is most often used for severe depression that is not getting better with other treatments.Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS)is a brain stimulation procedure that uses magnetic waves to relieve depression. It's not as powerful as ECT, but with rTMS, you don't need anesthesia. It also has a low risk of negative effects on your memory and thinking.
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)is a brain stimulation procedure that uses a mild electric current when you are under general anesthesia. ECT is most often used for severe depression that is not getting better with other treatments.Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS)is a brain stimulation procedure that uses magnetic waves to relieve depression. It's not as powerful as ECT, but with rTMS, you don't need anesthesia. It also has a low risk of negative effects on your memory and thinking.
Most cases of depression can't be prevented, but healthy lifestyle changes can have long-term benefits for your mental health. These can include:
Getting regularexerciseHaving a consistentsleep scheduleControllingstress
If you, or someone you love is depressed, see your provider or a mental health provider. It's important to get treatment at the earliest sign of a problem.
If you or someone you know has thoughts of hurting themselves or attempting suicide, get help right away. If it is an emergency, dial 911.
NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Teen Depression
Depressionin teens (ages 13-17) is a serious medical illness. It's more than just a feeling of being sad or "blue" for a few days. It is an intense feeling of sadness, hopelessness, and anger or frustration that lasts much longer. These feelings make it hard for you to function normally and do your usual activities. You may also have trouble focusing and have no motivation or energy. Depression can make you feel like it is hard to enjoy life or even get through the day.
Many factors may play a role in depression, including:
Genetics.Depression can run in families.Brain biology and chemistry.Hormones.Hormone changes can contribute to depression.Stressful childhood eventssuch as trauma, the death of a loved one,bullying, andabuse.
Depression can happen at any age, but often begins in the teens or early adulthood. Certain teens are at higher risk of depression, such as those who:
Have other mental health conditions, such asanxiety,eating disorders, andsubstance useHave other diseases, such asdiabetes,cancer, andheart diseaseHave family members with mental illnessHave a dysfunctional family/family conflictHave problems with friends or other kids at schoolHavelearning disabilitiesorattention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)Have had trauma in childhoodHave low self-esteem, a pessimistic outlook, or poor coping skillsAremembers of the LGBTQIA+ community, especially when their families are not supportive
If you have depression, you have one or more of these symptoms most of the time:
SadnessFeeling of emptinessHopelessnessBeing angry, irritable, or frustrated, even at minor things
You also may also have other symptoms, such as:
No longer caring about things you used to enjoyChanges in weight, such as losing weight when you are not dieting or gaining weight from eating too muchChanges in sleep, such as having trouble falling asleep or staying asleep, or sleeping much more than usualFeeling restless or having trouble sitting stillFeeling very tired or not having energyFeeling worthless or very guiltyHaving trouble concentrating, remembering information, or making decisionsThinking about dying orsuicide
If you think you might be depressed, tell someone that you trust, such as your:
Parents or guardianTeacher or counselorDoctor
The next step is to see your doctor for a checkup. Your doctor can first make sure that you do not have another health problem that is causing your depression. To do this, you may have a physical exam and lab tests.
If you don't have another health problem, you will get apsychological evaluation. Your doctor may do it, or you may be referred to a mental health professional to get one. You may be asked about things such as:
Your thoughts and feelingsHow you are doing at schoolAny changes in your eating, sleeping, or energy levelWhether you are suicidalWhether you use alcohol or drugs
Effective treatments for depression in teens include talk therapy, or a combination of talk therapy and medicines:
Talk therapy
Talk therapy, also called psychotherapy or counseling, can help you understand and manage your moods and feelings. It involves going to see a therapist, such as a psychiatrist, a psychologist, a social worker, or counselor. You can talk out your emotions to someone who understands and supports you. You can also learn how to stop thinking negatively and start to look at the positives in life. This will help you build confidence and feel better about yourself.
There are many different types of talk therapy. Certain types have been shown to help teens deal with depression, including:
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT),which helps you to identify and change negative and unhelpful thoughts. It also helps you build coping skills and change behavioral patterns.Interpersonal therapy (IPT),which focuses on improving your relationships. It helps you understand and work through troubled relationships that may contribute to your depression. IPT may help you change behaviors that are causing problems.  You also explore major issues that may add to your depression, such as grief or life changes.
Medicines
In some cases, your doctor will suggest medicines along with talk therapy. There are a fewantidepressantsthat have been widely studied and proven to help teens. If you are taking medicine for depression, it is important to see your doctor regularly.
It is also important to know that it will take some time for you to get relief from antidepressants:
It can take 3 to 4 weeks until an antidepressant takes effectYou may have to try more than one antidepressant to find one that works for youIt can also take some time to find the right dose of an antidepressant
In some cases, teenagers may have an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressants. This risk is higher in the first few weeks after starting the medicine and when the dose is changed.Make sure to tell your parents or guardian if you start feeling worse or have thoughts of hurting yourself.
You should not stop taking the antidepressants on your own. You need to work with your doctor to slowly and safely decrease the dose before you stop.
Programs for severe depression
Some teens who have severe depression or are at risk of hurting themselves may need more intensive treatment. They may go into a psychiatric hospital or do a day program. Both offer counseling, group discussions, and activities with mental health professionals and other patients. Day programs may be full-day or half-day, and they often last for several weeks.

Developmental Disabilities
Developmental disabilities are conditions that are usually present at birth. They can affect a child's growth and development. These conditions can cause physical, learning, language, or behavior issues. They can include:
Learning disabilities. These conditions affect the ability to learn.Autism spectrum disorder(ASD). This is a disorder that affects behavior, communication, and social skills.Cerebral palsy(CP). This is a condition that affects movement, coordination, and balance.Physical disabilities. These could includeblindnessordeafness.Conditions that can affect both physical and mental abilities. This could includeDown syndrome.
These conditions can cause lifelong challenges in learning. Completing daily tasks may be difficult. Early treatment may help your child learn important skills and make the most of their strengths.
Developmental disabilities are often present at birth. They can occur due to various reasons. These can include:
Genetic or chromosome abnormalities. These cause conditions such as Down syndrome,Fragile-X-Syndrome, andRett syndrome.Use of substances while pregnant. For example,drinking alcohol when pregnantcan causefetal alcohol spectrum disorders.Certaininfections during pregnancy.Preterm birthor lowbirth weight.
The way a developmental disability is diagnosed depends on the condition. Screening tests or a physical exam may be done to check for a medical problem. Other tests and questionnaires may help find out if your child has a developmental disability. These may include:
Screening tests that are done during pregnancy or for newbornsDevelopmental and behavioral screening tests or questionnaires  to check if your child is developing on scheduleObserving your child's behavior and how they interact with other peopleTesting your child's intellectual and school performanceAsking about your family history
If your child has a developmental disability, these are usually lifelong conditions. Often, there is no cure, but treatment can help the symptoms. Treatments can include:
Physical, speech, and occupational therapySpecial teaching methodsPsychological counselingTo keep track of how your child grows and changes over time
NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Dual Diagnosis
If you have a dual diagnosis, that means that you have both amental disorderand a substance use disorder (SUD), either withalcoholordrugs. A dual diagnosis is a type of comorbidity, which is when someone has two disorders at the same time. Another name for this is co-occurring disorders.
Mental and substance use disorders often occur together. Many people who develop SUDs are also diagnosed with mental disorders. And the reverse is true; many people with mental disorders will develop an SUD. Having both types of disorders is even more common in teenagers, people with serious mental illness, and people with certain mental disorders.
Although these problems often occur together, this does not mean that one caused the other, even if one appeared first. In fact, it can be hard to figure out which came first. Researchers think that there are three possible reasons as to why they often occur together:
Common risk factors can contribute to both mental disorders and SUDs.These factors include:Genetics.Stress.Trauma, especially in childhood. Veterans withpost-traumatic stress disorder(PTSD) are also at risk for SUDsMental disorders can contribute to drug use and SUDs.For example, people with mental disorders may use drugs or alcohol to try to feel better temporarily. This is known as self-medication. Also, mental disorders may change the brain to make it more likely that you will become addicted.Substance use and addiction can contribute to the development of a mental disorder.Substance use may change the brain in ways that make you more likely to develop a mental disorder.
Genetics.Stress.Trauma, especially in childhood. Veterans withpost-traumatic stress disorder(PTSD) are also at risk for SUDs
If you have a dual diagnosis, it is usually better to treat both conditions at the same time rather than separately. You and your health care provider can work on a treatment plan that fits your needs.The plan should take into account your age, which substance(s) you are misusing, and which specific mental disorder(s) you have. The plan may include:
Behavioral therapy,such as talk therapy (psychotherapy), long-term residential treatment (which combines housing and treatment services), and therapies to help you stay motivated to stick with your treatment plan.Medicines.There are effective medicines that treatopioid,alcohol, and nicotine addiction. There are also medicines that can lessen the symptoms of many mental disorders. Some medicines may treat more than one disorder.A referral to a support group.Support groups can give you emotional and social support. They are also a place where people can share tips about how to deal with day-to-day challenges.
NIH: National Institute on Drug Abuse
Bipolar Disorder and Alcoholism: Are They Related?(Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research)Also inSpanishCo-Occurring Disorders and Health Conditions(National Institute on Drug Abuse)Also inSpanishCo-Occurring: Mental Health and Substance Use Disorders(Mental Health America)FindTreatment.gov(Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration)Also inSpanishSubstance Abuse and Mental Health Services AdministrationSubstance Use and Co-Occurring Mental Disorders(National Institute of Mental Health)Substance Use Disorders(NAMI)Also inSpanish
ClinicalTrials.gov: Dual Diagnosis(National Institutes of Health)
Article: Atypical antipsychotics in the treatment of patients with a dual diagnosis...Article: Examining the Link Between Intolerance of Uncertainty and Positive and Negative...Article: Improving the treatment of patients with dual diagnosis in emergency departments.Dual Diagnosis -- see more articles
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
About MedlinePlusWhat's NewSite MapCustomer Support
Subscribe to RSSConnect with NLM
NLM Web PoliciesCopyrightAccessibilityGuidelines for LinksViewers & PlayersHHS Vulnerability DisclosureMedlinePlus Connect for EHRsFor Developers

Learning Disabilities
Learning disabilities are conditions that affect the ability to learn. They can cause problems with:
Understanding what people are sayingSpeakingReadingWritingDoing mathPaying attention
Often, children have more than one kind of learning disability. They may also have another condition, such asattention deficit hyperactivity disorder(ADHD).  This can make learning even more of a challenge. The sooner a learning disability is identified and addressed, the better a child is likely to perform in school.
Learning disabilities don't have anything to do with how smart your child is. They are caused by differences in the brain, and they affect the way the brain takes in and uses information. These differences are usually present at birth. But there are certain factors that can play a role in the development of a learning disability, including:
GeneticsEnvironmental exposures, such asleadUsing substances while pregnant
The earlier you can find and treat a learning disability, the better. Unfortunately, learning disabilities are usually not found until a child is in school. If you notice that your child is struggling, talk to your child's teacher or health care provider about having your child evaluated for a learning disability. The evaluation may include:
Doing a physical exam to check for a medical problem that might make learning more difficult.Asking about your family history.Test your child's intellectual and school performance.
The most common treatment for learning disabilities is special education. A teacher or other learning specialist can help your child learn skills by building on their strengths and finding ways to make up for their weaknesses. They may suggest ways you can help your child when they do homework. Instructors may try special teaching methods, make changes to the classroom, or use technologies that can assist your child's learning needs. Some children also get help from tutors or speech or language therapists.
A child with a learning disability may struggle with low self-esteem, frustration, and other problems. Mental health professionals can help your child understand these feelings, develop coping tools, and build healthy relationships.
If your child has another condition, such as ADHD, they will need treatment for that condition as well.
NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Older Adult Mental Health
Mental health includes our emotional, psychological, and social well-being. It affects how we think, feel, and act as we cope with life. It also helps determine how we handle stress, relate to others, and make choices. Mental health is important at every stage of life, including as we age.
Many older adults are at risk for mental health problems. But this does not mean that mental health problems are a normal part of aging. Studies show that most older adults feel satisfied with their lives, even though they may have more illnesses or physical problems.
Sometimes, however, important life changes can make you feel uneasy, stressed, and sad. These changes could include the death of a loved one, retirement, or dealing with a serious illness. Many older adults will eventually adjust to the changes. But some people will have more trouble adjusting. This can put them at risk formental disorderssuch asdepressionandanxiety.
It's important to recognize and treat mental disorders in older adults. These disorders don't just cause mental suffering. They can also make it harder for you to manage other health problems. This is especially true if those health problems are chronic.
Some of the warning signs of mental disorders in older adults include:
Changes in mood or energy levelA change in your eating or sleeping habitsWithdrawing from the people and activities you enjoyFeeling unusually confused, forgetful, angry, upset, worried, or scaredFeeling numb or like nothing mattersHaving unexplained aches and painsFeeling sadness or hopelessnessSmoking, drinking, or using drugs more than usualAnger, irritability, or aggressivenessHaving thoughts and memories that you can't get out of your headHearing voices or believing things that are not trueThinking of harming yourself or others
If you think that you may have a mental health problem, get help. Talk therapy and/or medicines can treat mental disorders. If you don't know where to start, contact your primary care provider.

Older Adult Mental Health
Mental health includes our emotional, psychological, and social well-being. It affects how we think, feel, and act as we cope with life. It also helps determine how we handle stress, relate to others, and make choices. Mental health is important at every stage of life, including as we age.
Many older adults are at risk for mental health problems. But this does not mean that mental health problems are a normal part of aging. Studies show that most older adults feel satisfied with their lives, even though they may have more illnesses or physical problems.
Sometimes, however, important life changes can make you feel uneasy, stressed, and sad. These changes could include the death of a loved one, retirement, or dealing with a serious illness. Many older adults will eventually adjust to the changes. But some people will have more trouble adjusting. This can put them at risk formental disorderssuch asdepressionandanxiety.
It's important to recognize and treat mental disorders in older adults. These disorders don't just cause mental suffering. They can also make it harder for you to manage other health problems. This is especially true if those health problems are chronic.
Some of the warning signs of mental disorders in older adults include:
Changes in mood or energy levelA change in your eating or sleeping habitsWithdrawing from the people and activities you enjoyFeeling unusually confused, forgetful, angry, upset, worried, or scaredFeeling numb or like nothing mattersHaving unexplained aches and painsFeeling sadness or hopelessnessSmoking, drinking, or using drugs more than usualAnger, irritability, or aggressivenessHaving thoughts and memories that you can't get out of your headHearing voices or believing things that are not trueThinking of harming yourself or others
If you think that you may have a mental health problem, get help. Talk therapy and/or medicines can treat mental disorders. If you don't know where to start, contact your primary care provider.

Bereavement
Bereavement is the period of grief and mourning after a death. When you grieve, it's part of the normal process of reacting to a loss. You may experience grief as a mental, physical, social or emotional reaction. Mental reactions can include anger, guilt, anxiety, sadness and despair. Physical reactions can include sleeping problems, changes in appetite, physical problems or illness.
How long bereavement lasts can depend on how close you were to the person who died, if the person's death was expected and other factors. Friends, family and faith may be sources of support. Grief counseling or grief therapy is also helpful to some people.
NIH: National Cancer Institute

Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is amental disorderin which you have thoughts (obsessions) and rituals (compulsions) over and over. They interfere with your life, but you cannot control or stop them.
The cause of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is unknown. Factors such as genetics, brain biology and chemistry, and your environment may play a role.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) usually begins when you are a teen or young adult. Boys often develop OCD at a younger age than girls.
Risk factors for OCD include:
Family history.People with a first-degree relative (such as a parent, sibling, or child) who has OCD are at higher risk. This is especially true if the relative developed OCD as a child or teen.Brain structure and functioning.Imaging studies have shown that people with OCD have differences in certain parts of the brain. Researchers need to do more studies to understand the connection between the brain differences and OCD.Childhood trauma,such aschild abuse. Some studies have found a link between trauma in childhood and OCD. More research is needed to understand this relationship better.
In some cases, children may develop OCD or OCD symptoms following astreptococcal infection. This is called Pediatric Autoimmune Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated with Streptococcal Infections (PANDAS).
People with OCD may have symptoms of obsessions, compulsions, or both:
Obsessionsare repeated thoughts, urges, or mental images that causeanxiety. They may involve things such asFear of germs or contaminationFear of losing or misplacing somethingWorries about harm coming towards yourself or othersUnwanted forbidden thoughts involving sex or religionAggressive thoughts towards yourself or othersNeeding things lined up exactly or arranged in a particular, precise wayCompulsionsare behaviors that you feel like you need to do over and over to try to reduce your anxiety or stop the obsessive thoughts. Some common compulsions includeExcessive cleaning and/or handwashingRepeatedly checking on things, such as whether the door is locked or the oven is offCompulsive countingOrdering and arranging things in a particular, precise way
Fear of germs or contaminationFear of losing or misplacing somethingWorries about harm coming towards yourself or othersUnwanted forbidden thoughts involving sex or religionAggressive thoughts towards yourself or othersNeeding things lined up exactly or arranged in a particular, precise way
Excessive cleaning and/or handwashingRepeatedly checking on things, such as whether the door is locked or the oven is offCompulsive countingOrdering and arranging things in a particular, precise way
Some people with OCD also haveTourette syndromeor another tic disorder. Tics are sudden twitches, movements, or sounds that people do over and over. People who have tics cannot stop their body from doing these things.
The first step is to talk with your health care provider about your symptoms. It's important to check whether a physical problem is causing your symptoms. So your provider will do a physical exam and will ask you about your medical history. If  your symptoms do not seem to be caused by a physical problem, your provider may do anOCD testor may refer you to a mental health specialist for further evaluation or treatment.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) can sometimes be hard to diagnose. Its symptoms are like those of other mental disorders, such as anxiety disorders. It is also possible to have both OCD and another mental disorder.
Not everyone who has obsessions or compulsions has OCD. Your symptoms would usually be considered OCD when you:
Can't control your thoughts or behaviors, even when you know that they are excessiveSpend at least 1 hour a day on these thoughts or behaviorsDon't get pleasure when performing the behaviors. But doing them may briefly give you relief from the anxiety.Have significant problems in your daily life because of these thoughts or behaviors
The main treatments for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) are cognitive behavioral therapy, medicines, or both:
Cognitive behavioral therapy(CBT) is a type of psychotherapy. It teaches you different ways of thinking, behaving, and reacting to your obsessions and compulsions.Exposure and Response Prevention (ERP)s a specific type of CBT. ERP involves gradually exposing you to your fears or obsessions. You learn healthy ways to deal with the anxiety they cause.Medicinesfor OCD include certain types ofantidepressants. If those don't work for you, your provider may suggest taking some other type of psychiatric medicine.
Exposure and Response Prevention (ERP)s a specific type of CBT. ERP involves gradually exposing you to your fears or obsessions. You learn healthy ways to deal with the anxiety they cause.
If you have severe OCD that does not get better with these treatments, your provider may suggest a treatment called repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS). It is a brain stimulation procedure that uses magnetic waves. It can target specific brain areas associated with OCD.
NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

How to Improve Mental Health
Mental health includes our emotional, psychological, and social well-being. It affects how we think, feel, and act as we cope with life. It also helps determine how we handlestress, relate to others, and make choices. Mental health is important at every stage of life, fromchildhoodandadolescencethrough adulthood andaging.
Mental health is important because it can help you to:
Cope with the stresses of lifeBe physically healthyHave good relationshipsMake meaningful contributions to your communityWork productivelyRealize your full potential
There are many different things you can do to improve your mental health, including:
Staying positive.It's important to try to have a positive outlook; some ways to do that include:Finding balance between positive and negative emotions.  Staying positive doesn't mean that you never feel negative emotions, such as sadness or anger. You need to feel them so that you can move through difficult situations. They can help you to respond to a problem. But you don't want those emotions to take over. For example, it's not helpful to keep thinking about bad things that happened in the past or worry too much about the future.Trying to hold on to the positive emotions when you have themTaking a break from negative information. Know when to stop watching or reading the news. Use social media to reach out for support and feel connected to others but be careful. Don't fall for rumors, get into arguments, or negatively compare your life to others.Practicing gratitude, which means being thankful for the good things in your life. It's helpful to do this every day, either by thinking about what you are grateful for or writing it down in a journal. These can be big things, such as the support you have from loved ones, or little things, such as enjoying a nice meal. It's important to allow yourself a moment to enjoy that you had the positive experience.  Practicing gratitude can help you to see your life differently. For example, when you are stressed, you may not notice that there are also moments when you have some positive emotions. Gratitude can help you to recognize them.Taking care of your physical health, since your physical and mental health are connected. Some ways to take care of your physical health include:Being physically active. Exercise can reduce feelings of stress anddepressionand improve your mood.Getting enough sleep. Sleep affects your mood. If you don't get a good sleep, you may become more easily annoyed and angry. Over the long term, a lack of quality sleep can make you more likely to become depressed. So it's important to make sure that you have a regular sleep schedule and get enough quality sleep every night.Healthy eating. Good nutrition will help you feel better physically but could also improve your mood and decreaseanxietyand stress. Also, not having enough of certain nutrients may contribute to some mental illnesses. For example, there may be a link between low levels ofvitamin B12and depression. Eating a well-balanced diet can help you to get enough of the nutrients you need.Connecting with others.Humans are social creatures, and it's important to have strong, healthy relationships with others. Having good social support may help protect you against the harms of stress. It is also good to have different types of connections. Besides connecting with family and friends, you could find ways to get involved with your community or neighborhood. For example, you could volunteer for a local organization or join a group that is focused on a hobby you enjoy.Developing a sense of meaning and purpose in life.This could be through your job, volunteering, learning new skills, or exploring your spirituality.Developing coping skills, which are methods you use to deal with stressful situations. They may help you face a problem, take action, be flexible, and not easily give up in solving it.Meditation, which is a mind and body practice where you learn to focus your attention and awareness. There are many types, including mindfulness meditation and transcendental meditation. Meditation usually involves:A quiet location with as few distractions as possibleA specific, comfortable posture. This could be sitting, lying down, walking, or another position.A focus of attention, such as a specially chosen word or set of words, an object, or your breathingAn open attitude, where you try to let distractions come and go naturally without judging themRelaxation techniquesare practices you do to produce your body's natural relaxation response. This slows down your breathing, lowers your blood pressure, and reduces muscle tension and stress. Types of relaxation techniques include:Progressive relaxation, where you tighten and relax different muscle groups, sometimes while using mental imagery or breathing exercisesGuided imagery, where you learn to focus on positive images in your mind, to help you feel more relaxed and focusedBiofeedback, where you use electronic devices to learn to control certain body functions, such as breathing, heart rate, and muscle tensionSelf-hypnosis, where the goal is to get yourself into a relaxed, trance-like state when you hear a certain suggestion or see a specific cueDeep breathing exercises, which involve focusing on taking slow, deep, even breaths
Finding balance between positive and negative emotions.  Staying positive doesn't mean that you never feel negative emotions, such as sadness or anger. You need to feel them so that you can move through difficult situations. They can help you to respond to a problem. But you don't want those emotions to take over. For example, it's not helpful to keep thinking about bad things that happened in the past or worry too much about the future.Trying to hold on to the positive emotions when you have themTaking a break from negative information. Know when to stop watching or reading the news. Use social media to reach out for support and feel connected to others but be careful. Don't fall for rumors, get into arguments, or negatively compare your life to others.
Being physically active. Exercise can reduce feelings of stress anddepressionand improve your mood.Getting enough sleep. Sleep affects your mood. If you don't get a good sleep, you may become more easily annoyed and angry. Over the long term, a lack of quality sleep can make you more likely to become depressed. So it's important to make sure that you have a regular sleep schedule and get enough quality sleep every night.Healthy eating. Good nutrition will help you feel better physically but could also improve your mood and decreaseanxietyand stress. Also, not having enough of certain nutrients may contribute to some mental illnesses. For example, there may be a link between low levels ofvitamin B12and depression. Eating a well-balanced diet can help you to get enough of the nutrients you need.
A quiet location with as few distractions as possibleA specific, comfortable posture. This could be sitting, lying down, walking, or another position.A focus of attention, such as a specially chosen word or set of words, an object, or your breathingAn open attitude, where you try to let distractions come and go naturally without judging them
Progressive relaxation, where you tighten and relax different muscle groups, sometimes while using mental imagery or breathing exercisesGuided imagery, where you learn to focus on positive images in your mind, to help you feel more relaxed and focusedBiofeedback, where you use electronic devices to learn to control certain body functions, such as breathing, heart rate, and muscle tensionSelf-hypnosis, where the goal is to get yourself into a relaxed, trance-like state when you hear a certain suggestion or see a specific cueDeep breathing exercises, which involve focusing on taking slow, deep, even breaths
It's also important to recognize when you need to get help. Talk therapy and/or medicines can treatmental disorders. If you don't know where to get treatment, start by contacting your primary care provider.

Mild Cognitive Impairment
Some forgetfulness can be a normal part of aging.   However, some people have morememoryproblems than other people their age. This condition is called mild cognitive impairment, or MCI. People with MCI can take care of themselves and do their normal activities.
MCI memory problems may include:
Losing things oftenForgetting to go to events and appointmentsHaving more trouble coming up with words than other people of the same age
Memory problems can also have other causes, including certain medicines and diseases that affect the blood vessels that supply the brain. Some of the problems brought on by these conditions can be managed or reversed.
Your health care provider can do thinking, memory, and language tests to see if you have MCI. You may also need to see a specialist for more tests. Because MCI may be an early sign ofAlzheimer's disease, it's really important to see your health care provider every 6 to 12 months.
At this time, there is no proven drug treatment for MCI. Your health care provider can check to see if you have any changes in your memory or thinking skills over time.
NIH: National Institute on Aging

Mood Disorders
Most people feel sad or irritable from time to time. They may say they're in a bad mood. A mood disorder is different. It affects a person's everyday emotional state. Nearly one in ten people aged 18 and older have mood disorders. These includedepressionandbipolar disorder(also called manic depression).
Mood disorders can increase a person's risk for heart disease, diabetes, and other diseases. Treatments include medication, psychotherapy, or a combination of both. With treatment, most people with mood disorders can lead productive lives.

Panic Disorder
Panic disorder is a type ofanxiety disorder.  It causes repeated panic attacks, which are sudden periods of intense fear, discomfort, or a sense of losing control. These attacks happen even though there is no real danger. They often cause physical symptoms. For example, you may have a rapid or pounding heartbeat and feel like you are having aheart attack.
If you have panic attacks, it doesn't mean you will develop a panic disorder. Many people only have one or two panic attacks in their lifetime and get better without treatment.
But some of the people who have panic attacks do develop panic disorder. They have repeated panic attacks. The attacks can happen as often as several times a day or as rarely as a few times a year. People with panic disorder often worry about having another attack. It may cause them to avoid places and situations where they had panic attacks in the past.
Panic disorder is not life-threatening, but it can be upsetting and affect your quality of life. And if it is not treated, it can sometimes lead to other health conditions, includingdepressionand substance use disorders.
The cause of panic disorder is unknown. Researchers think that certain factors may play a role:
Genetics - panic disorder sometimes runs in families. But no one knows for sure why some family members have it while others don't.Brain biology and chemistry.Your environment.Majorstress.
Panic disorder is more common in women than men. It often starts in the late teens or early adulthood. Sometimes it starts when a person is under a lot of stress. People who have had trauma, especially in childhood, are more likely to develop panic disorder.
People with panic disorder may have:
Sudden and repeated panic attacks of overwhelming anxiety and fearA feeling of being out of control or a fear of death during a panic attackAn intense worry about another panic attackA fear or avoidance of places and situations where they had panic attacks in the pastPhysical symptoms during a panic attack, such as:Pounding or racing heartSweating or chillsTrembling or shakingTrouble breathingThe feeling that they are chokingWeakness ordizzinessChest painStomach pain ornausea
Pounding or racing heartSweating or chillsTrembling or shakingTrouble breathingThe feeling that they are chokingWeakness ordizzinessChest painStomach pain ornausea
Panic attacks can happen anytime, without warning. They can last anywhere from a few minutes to over an hour.
To find out if you have panic disorder, your health care provider:
Will ask about your medical history and symptomsMay check if an unrelated physical problem is causing your symptoms, for example with:A physical examBlood tests to check forthyroid problemsand other possible conditionsHeart health testsMay do apanic disorder testMay refer you to a mental health provider for the panic disorder test or other types of psychological evaluations
A physical examBlood tests to check forthyroid problemsand other possible conditionsHeart health tests
Treatment for panic disorder usually includes one or more of the following:
Talk therapy, also called psychotherapy or counseling, which can help you understand your feelings.It may includecognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT),a type of talk therapy that helps you change your negative thoughts and how you react to things that cause you to feel anxiety.Medicines, including:Antidepressants, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs)Anti-anxiety medicines
It may includecognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT),a type of talk therapy that helps you change your negative thoughts and how you react to things that cause you to feel anxiety.
Antidepressants, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs)Anti-anxiety medicines
Your provider may also suggest that you follow a healthy lifestyle, which may help with panic disorder. It may include:
Avoiding alcoholReducingcaffeineEating regular mealsGetting enough sleepGetting regular exercise
Joining a support group may also be helpful. Support groups can make you feel like you are not alone, and you may learn some new tips on how to cope.
NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a mental health disorder that some people develop after they experience or see a traumatic event. The traumatic event may be life-threatening, such as combat, anatural disaster, a car accident, orsexual assault. But sometimes the event is not necessarily a dangerous one. For example, the sudden, unexpected death of a loved one can also cause PTSD.
It's normal to feel afraid during and after a traumatic situation. The fear triggers a "fight-or-flight" response. This is your body's way of helping to protect itself from possible harm. It causes changes in your body such as the release of certain hormones and increases in alertness, blood pressure, heart rate, and breathing.
In time, most people recover from this naturally. But people with PTSD don't feel better. They feel stressed and frightened long after the trauma is over. In some cases, the PTSD symptoms may start later on. They might also come and go over time.
Researchers don't know why some people get PTSD and others don't. Genetics, neurobiology, risk factors, and personal factors may affect whether you get PTSD after a traumatic event.
You can develop PTSD at any age. Many risk factors play a part in whether you will develop PTSD. They include:
Your sex; women are more likely to develop PTSDHaving had trauma in childhoodFeeling horror, helplessness, or extreme fearGoing through a traumatic event that lasts a long timeHaving little or no social support after the eventDealing with extra stress after the event, such as loss of a loved one, pain and injury, or loss of a job or homeHaving a history ofmental illnessorsubstance use
There are four types of PTSD symptoms, but they may not be the same for everyone. Each person experiences symptoms in their own way. The types are:
Re-experiencing symptoms, when something reminds you of the trauma and you feel that fear again. Examples includeFlashbacks, which cause you to feel like you are going through the event againNightmaresFrightening thoughtsAvoidance symptoms, when you try to avoid situations or people that trigger memories of the traumatic event. This may cause you toStay away from places, events, or objects that are reminders of the traumatic experience. For example, if you were in a car accident, you might stop driving.Avoiding thoughts or feelings related to the traumatic event. For example, you might try to stay very busy to try to avoid thinking about what happened.Arousal and reactivity symptoms, which may cause you to be jittery or be on the lookout for danger. They includeBeing easily startledFeeling tense or "on edge"Havingdifficulty sleepingHaving angry outburstsCognition and mood symptoms, which are negative changes in beliefs and feelings. They includeTrouble remembering important things about the traumatic eventNegative thoughts about yourself or the worldFeeling blame and guiltNo longer being interested in things you enjoyedTrouble concentrating
Flashbacks, which cause you to feel like you are going through the event againNightmaresFrightening thoughts
Stay away from places, events, or objects that are reminders of the traumatic experience. For example, if you were in a car accident, you might stop driving.Avoiding thoughts or feelings related to the traumatic event. For example, you might try to stay very busy to try to avoid thinking about what happened.
Being easily startledFeeling tense or "on edge"Havingdifficulty sleepingHaving angry outbursts
Trouble remembering important things about the traumatic eventNegative thoughts about yourself or the worldFeeling blame and guiltNo longer being interested in things you enjoyedTrouble concentrating
The symptoms usually start soon after the traumatic event. But sometimes they may not appear until months or years later. They also may come and go over many years.
If your symptoms last longer than four weeks, cause you great distress, or interfere with your work or home life, you might have PTSD.
A health care provider who has experience helping people with mental illnesses can diagnose PTSD. The provider will do amental health screeningand may also do a physical exam. To get a diagnosis of PTSD, you must have all of these symptoms for at least one month:
At least one re-experiencing symptomAt least one avoidance symptomAt least two arousal and reactivity symptomsAt least two cognition and mood symptoms
The main treatments for PTSD are talk therapy, medicines, or both. PTSD affects people differently, so a treatment that works for one person may not work for another. If you have PTSD, you need to work with a mental health professional to find the best treatment for your symptoms.:
Talk therapy, or psychotherapy, can teach you about your symptoms. You will learn how to identify what triggers them and how to manage them. There are different types of talk therapy for PTSD.Medicinescan help with the symptoms of PTSD.Antidepressantsmay help control symptoms such as sadness, worry, anger, and feeling numb inside. Other medicines can help with sleep problems and nightmares.
There are certain factors that can help reduce the risk of developing PTSD. These are known as resilience factors, and they include:
Seeking out support from other people, such as friends, family, or a support groupLearning to feel good about your actions in the face of dangerHaving a coping strategy or a way of getting through the bad event and learning from itBeing able to act and respond effectively despite feeling fear
NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Prader-Willi Syndrome
Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) is a rare genetic disorder. It causes poor muscle tone, low levels of sex hormones and a constant feeling of hunger. The part of the brain that controls feelings of fullness or hunger does not work properly in people with PWS. They overeat, leading toobesity.
Babies with PWS are usually floppy, with poor muscle tone, and have trouble sucking. Boys may have undescended testicles. Later, other signs appear. These include:
Short staturePoor motor skillsWeight gainUnderdeveloped sex organsMild intellectual and learning disabilities
There is no cure for PWS. Growth hormone, exercise, and dietary supervision can help build muscle mass and control weight. Other treatments may include sex hormones and behavior therapy. Most people with PWS will need specialized care and supervision throughout their lives.
NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
About Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS)(Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development)Also inSpanishGenes and Disease: Prader-Willi Syndrome(National Center for Biotechnology Information)How Do Health Care Providers Diagnose Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS)?(Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development)Also inSpanishPrader-Willi Syndrome(Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research)Also inSpanishPrader-Willi Syndrome (PWS): Other FAQs(Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development)Also inSpanishWhat Are the Symptoms of Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS)?(Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development)Also inSpanishWhat Are the Treatments for Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS)?(Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development)Also inSpanishWhat Causes Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS)?(Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development)Also inSpanishWhat is Prader-Willi Syndrome?(Prader-Willi Syndrome Association)
Prader-Willi syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics(National Library of Medicine)
ClinicalTrials.gov: Prader-Willi Syndrome(National Institutes of Health)
Article: Long-term impact of growth hormone therapy on mortality and type 2...Article: Development of disease-specific growth charts for Argentine Prader-Willi syndrome without growth...Article: Altered Behavior and Neuronal Activity with Paternal Snord116 Deletion.Prader-Willi Syndrome -- see more articles
Prader-Willi syndrome(Medical Encyclopedia)Also inSpanish
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
About MedlinePlusWhat's NewSite MapCustomer Support
Subscribe to RSSConnect with NLM
NLM Web PoliciesCopyrightAccessibilityGuidelines for LinksViewers & PlayersHHS Vulnerability DisclosureMedlinePlus Connect for EHRsFor Developers

Mental Disorders
Mental disorders (or mental illnesses) are conditions that affect your thinking, feeling, mood, and behavior. They may happen over a short period of time or come and go. Some can be chronic (long-lasting). They can affect your ability to relate to others and function each day..
There are many different types of mental disorders. Some common ones include:
Anxiety disorders, includingpanic disorder,obsessive-compulsive disorder, andphobiasDepression,bipolar disorder, and othermood disordersEating disordersPersonality disordersPost-traumatic stress disorder(PTSD)Psychotic disorders, includingschizophrenia
There is no single cause for mental illness. A number of factors can contribute to risk for mental illness, such as:
Your genes and family historyYour life experiences, such as stress or a history of abuse, especially if they happen in childhoodBiological factors such as chemical imbalances in the brainAtraumatic brain injury(TBI)Prenatal (before birth) exposure toviruses,toxic chemicals, orother substancessuch as alcohol and drugs.Use ofalcoholorrecreational drugsHaving a serious medical condition like cancerHaving few friends, and feeling lonely or isolated
Mental disorders are not caused by character flaws. They have nothing to do with being lazy or weak.
Mental disorders are common. Many Americans will be diagnosed with a mental disorder at some time in their life.
The steps to getting a diagnosis include:
A medical historyA physical exam and possibly lab tests, if your provider thinks that other medical conditions could be causing your symptomsApsychological evaluation. You will answer questions about your thinking, feelings, and behaviors.
Treatment depends on which mental disorder you have and how serious it is. You and your provider will work on a treatment plan just for you. It usually involves some type of therapy. You may also take medicines. Some people also need social support and education on managing their condition.
In some cases, you may need more intensive treatment. You may need to go to a psychiatric hospital.  This could be because your mental illness is severe. Or it could be because you are at risk of hurting yourself or someone else. In the hospital, you will get counseling, group discussions, and activities with mental health professionals and other patients.

Stress
Stress is how your brain and body respond to a challenge or demand. When you are stressed, your body releases certainhormones. Hormones are chemicals that travel in your bloodstream and control how different parts of your body work. The hormones that are released when you are stressed make you alert and ready to act. They can raise your blood pressure, heart rate, andblood glucose(blood sugar) levels. This response is sometimes called a "fight or flight" response.
Everyone gets stressed from time to time. There are different types of stress. It can be short-term or long-term. It can be caused by something that happens once or something that keeps happening.
Not all stress is bad. In fact, it can help you survive in a dangerous situation. For example, one kind of stress is the jolt you may feel when a car pulls out in front of you while you are driving. This jolt of hormones helps you quickly hit the brakes to avoid an accident. A little short-term stress can sometimes be helpful. For example, the stress of having a deadline for school or your job may push you to get your work done on time. Once you finish it, that stress goes away.
But stress that lasts a long time can harm your health.
Long-term stress, or chronic stress, lasts for weeks, months, or longer. As you go about your life, your body is acting as if you're being threatened.
Causes of long-term stress include:
Routine stressfrom the demands of work, school, family needs, money problems, and other daily pressures that don't stop.Stress from sudden, difficult changes in your life,such as divorce, illness, losing your job, or other unhappy life events that often have a long impact.Traumatic stress,which may happen when you're in danger of serious harm or death. Examples include being in a bad accident, a war, a flood, earthquake, or other frightening event. This type of stress can cause a long-lasting problem calledpost-traumatic stress disorder(PTSD).
People respond to stress in different ways. If you're stressed for a long time you may notice that you are:
Getting sick more often than usual because stress weakens your body's ability to fight germsHaving stomach problems ortrouble digesting foodHaving trouble sleepingHaving headachesFeeling sad, angry, or easily upset
When stress keeps going, your body acts as if you're always in danger. That's a lot of strain that may play a part in developing serious health problems, including:
DepressionAnxietyHeart diseaseHigh blood pressureDiabetes
It's possible to get used to the symptoms of stress and not even realize there's a problem. So when there's a lot of stress in your life, it's important to pay attention to how it affects you so you can do something about it.
Simple things thatimprove your mental healthmay be helpful in managing long-term stress, such as:
Get regular exercise.A 30-minute daily walk can help you feel better and help keep your immune system strong, so you don't get sick.Try relaxing activities.You could look for an app or wellness program that uses breathing, meditation, or muscle relaxation exercises.Getenough sleepevery night.Avoid too muchcaffeine.Decide what you need to do now and what can wait.And focus on what you got done each day, not on what you weren't able to do.Ask your family or friends for support.
Get help if you're having severe symptoms for 2 weeks or more, including:
Trouble sleepingChanges in your eating that cause unwanted changes in your weightTroubles getting out of bed because of your moodDifficulty focusing your thoughtsLosing interest in things you usually enjoyNot being able to do your usual daily activities
Always get help right away if stress is causing you to:
Have thoughts ofsuicideFeel you can't copeUse drugs or alcohol more often than usual
Your health care provider may refer you to a mental health professional such as a psychologist or social worker.
NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Psychotic Disorders
Psychotic disorders are severe mental disorders that cause abnormal thinking and perceptions. People with psychoses lose touch with reality. Two of the main symptoms are delusions and hallucinations. Delusions are false beliefs, such as thinking that someone is plotting against you or that the TV is sending you secret messages. Hallucinations are false perceptions, such as hearing, seeing, or feeling something that is not there.
Schizophreniais one type of psychotic disorder. People withbipolar disordermay also have psychotic symptoms. Other problems that can cause psychosis include alcohol and some drugs, brain tumors, brain infections, and stroke.
Treatment depends on the cause of the psychosis. It might involve drugs to control symptoms and talk therapy. Hospitalization is an option for serious cases where a person might be dangerous to himself or others.

Seasonal Affective Disorder
Seasonal affective disorder (SAD) is a type ofdepressionthat comes and goes with the seasons. It usually starts in the late fall and early winter and goes away during the spring and summer. Some people do have episodes of depression that start in the spring or summer, but that is a lot less common. Symptoms of SAD may include:
SadnessGloomy outlookFeeling hopeless, worthless, and irritableLoss of interest or pleasure in activities you used to enjoyLow energyDifficulty sleeping or oversleepingCarbohydrate cravings and weight gainThoughts of death orsuicide
SAD is more common in women, young people, and those who live far from the equator. You are also more likely to have SAD if you or your family members have depression.
The exact causes of SAD are unknown. Researchers have found that people with SAD may have an imbalance of serotonin, a brain chemical that affects your mood. Their bodies also make too much melatonin, a hormone that regulates sleep, and not enough vitamin D.
The main treatment for SAD is light therapy. The idea behind light therapy is to replace the sunshine that you miss during the fall and winter months. You sit in front of a light therapy box every morning to get daily exposure to bright, artificial light. But some people with SAD do not respond to light therapy alone. Antidepressant medicines and talk therapy can reduce SAD symptoms, either alone or combined with light therapy.
NIH: National Institute of Mental Health
Feeling SAD?: Identifying and Treating Seasonal Affective DisorderAlso inSpanishPsychotherapies(National Institute of Mental Health)Seasonal Affective Disorder(National Institute of Mental Health)Also inSpanishSeasonal Affective Disorder (SAD)(Nemours Foundation)Also inSpanishSeasonal Affective Disorder (SAD)(Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research)Also inSpanishSeasonal Affective Disorder (SAD): More than the Winter Blues(National Institute of Mental Health)Also inSpanishSeasonal Affective Disorder Sufferers Have More than Just Winter Blues(American Psychological Association)Seasonal affective disorder treatment: Choosing a light box(Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research)Also inSpanish
Seasonal affective disorder: MedlinePlus Genetics(National Library of Medicine)
ClinicalTrials.gov: Seasonal Affective Disorder(National Institutes of Health)
Article: Optimizing Winter-Type Seasonality Criteria in East Asian Populations: A Machine Learning...Article: Effectiveness of visible light for seasonal affective disorder: A systematic review...Article: Evaluation of seasonal variations for the seasonal pattern assessment in mood...Seasonal Affective Disorder -- see more articles
Seasonal affective disorder(Medical Encyclopedia)Also inSpanish
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
About MedlinePlusWhat's NewSite MapCustomer Support
Subscribe to RSSConnect with NLM
NLM Web PoliciesCopyrightAccessibilityGuidelines for LinksViewers & PlayersHHS Vulnerability DisclosureMedlinePlus Connect for EHRsFor Developers

Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is a serious brain illness. People who have it may hear voices that aren't there. They may think other people are trying to hurt them. Sometimes they don't make sense when they talk. The disorder makes it hard for them to keep a job or take care of themselves.
Symptoms of schizophrenia usually start between ages 16 and 30. Men often develop symptoms at a younger age than women. People usually do not get schizophrenia after age 45. There are three types of symptoms:
Psychotic symptoms distort a person's thinking.  These include hallucinations (hearing or seeing things that are not there), delusions (beliefs that are not true), trouble organizing thoughts, and strange movements."Negative" symptoms make it difficult to show emotions and to function normally. A person may seem depressed and withdrawn.Cognitive symptoms affect the thought process.  These include trouble using information, making decisions, and paying attention.
No one is sure what causes schizophrenia.  Your genes, environment, and brain chemistry may play a role.
There is no cure. Medicine can help control many of the symptoms. You may need to try different medicines to see which works best. You should stay on your medicine for as long as your doctor recommends. Additional treatments can help you deal with your illness from day to day.  These include therapy, family education, rehabilitation, and skills training.
NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Suicide
Suicide is the taking of one's own life. It is a death that happens when someone harms themselves because they want to end their life. A suicide attempt is when someone harms themselves to try to end their life, but they do not die.
Suicide is a major public health problem and a leading cause of death in the United States. Both suicide and suicide attempts can have lasting harmful effects:
People who survive a suicide attempt may have serious injuries that can affect their long-term health. They may also havedepressionor other mental health concerns.When people die by suicide, it affects their family, friends, and community. They may feel grief, shock, anger, and guilt. Some may developpost-traumatic stress disorder(PTSD), depression, oranxiety. They may also be at risk for suicidal thoughts.
Suicide does not discriminate. It can touch anyone, anywhere, at any time. But there are certain factors that can contribute to the risk of suicide, including:
Having attempted suicide beforeDepression and othermental health disordersAlcoholordruguse disorderFamily history of a mental health disorderFamily history of an alcohol or drug use disorderFamily history of suicideFamily violence, includingintimate partner violence,child abuse, orsexualabuseHaving guns in the homeBeing in or having recently gotten out of prison or jailBeing exposed to others' suicidal behavior, such as a family member, peer, or celebrityMedical illness, includingchronic painStressful life event, such as a job loss, financial problems, loss of a loved one, a breakup of a relationship, etc.Being between the ages of 15 and 24 years or over age 60
The warning signs for suicide include:
Talking about wanting to die or wanting to kill oneselfMaking a plan or looking for a way to kill oneself, such as searching onlineBuying a gun or stockpiling pillsFeeling empty, hopeless, trapped, or like there's no reason to liveBeing in unbearable painTalking about being a burden to othersUsing more alcohol or drugsActing anxious or agitated; behaving recklesslySleeping too little or too muchWithdrawing from family or friends or feeling isolatedShowing rage or talking about seeking revengeDisplaying extreme mood swingsSaying good-bye to loved ones, putting affairs in order
Some people may tell others about their suicidal thoughts. But others may try to hide them. This can make some of the signs harder to spot.
If you or someone you know has the warning signs for suicide,get help right away, especially if there is a change in behavior. If it is an emergency, dial 911. Otherwise there are five steps that you can take:
Askthe person if they're thinking about killing themselves.Keep them safe.Find out whether they have a plan for suicide and keep them away from things that they can use to kill themselves.Be there with them.Listen carefully and find out what they are thinking and feeling.Help them connectto resources that can help them, such as through:Calling or texting the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline at 988.Chatting throughLifeline Chat.For veterans, reaching the Veterans Crisis Line by:Calling 988 and then pressing 1.Texting to 838255.Chattingwith them.Stay connected.Staying in touch after a crisis can make a difference.
Calling or texting the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline at 988.Chatting throughLifeline Chat.For veterans, reaching the Veterans Crisis Line by:Calling 988 and then pressing 1.Texting to 838255.Chattingwith them.
Calling 988 and then pressing 1.Texting to 838255.Chattingwith them.
NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

